             © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.




ALTERNATIVE
INVESTMENTS




CFA® Program Curriculum
2025 • LEVEL 1 • VOLUME 8
© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.




©2023 by CFA Institute. All rights reserved. This copyright covers material written
expressly for this volume by the editor/s as well as the compilation itself. It does
not cover the individual selections herein that first appeared elsewhere. Permission
to reprint these has been obtained by CFA Institute for this edition only. Further
reproductions by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and
recording, or by any information storage or retrieval systems, must be arranged with
the individual copyright holders noted.
     CFA®, Chartered Financial Analyst®, AIMR-PPS®, and GIPS® are just a few of the
trademarks owned by CFA Institute. To view a list of CFA Institute trademarks and the
Guide for Use of CFA Institute Marks, please visit our website at www​.cfainstitute​.org.
     This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information
in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the
publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional service.
If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent pro-
fessional should be sought.
     All trademarks, service marks, registered trademarks, and registered service marks
are the property of their respective owners and are used herein for identification
purposes only.
     ISBN 9781961409057 (paper)
     ISBN 9781961409170 (ebook)
     May 2024
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.




  CONTENTS

How to Use the CFA Program Curriculum  	                                                                 vii
                               CFA Institute Learning Ecosystem (LES)  	                                 vii
                               Designing Your Personal Study Program  	                                  vii
                               Errata  	                                                                 viii
                               Other Feedback  	                                                         viii

Alternative Investments

Learning Module 1              Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures  	                3
                               Introduction  	                                                            3
                               Alternative Investment Features  	                                         6
                                      Alternative Investments: Features and Categories  	                 6
                                      Private Capital  	                                                  7
                                      Real Assets  	                                                      8
                                      Hedge Funds  	                                                     11
                               Alternative Investment Methods  	                                         12
                                      Alternative Investment Methods  	                                  12
                                      Fund Investment  	                                                 13
                                      Co-Investment  	                                                   16
                                      Direct Investment  	                                               16
                               Alternative Investment Structures  	                                      19
                                      Alternative Investment Ownership and Compensation Structures  	    19
                                      Ownership Structures  	                                            19
                                      Compensation Structures  	                                         22
                               Practice Problems  	                                                      29
                               Solutions  	                                                              31

Learning Module 2              Alternative Investment Performance and Returns  	                         33
                               Introduction  	                                                           33
                               Alternative Investment Performance  	                                     36
                                      Alternative Investment Performance Appraisal  	                    36
                                      Comparability with Traditional Asset Classes  	                    36
                                      Performance Appraisal and Alternative Investment Features  	       36
                               Alternative Investment Returns  	                                         44
                                      Alternative Investment Returns  	                                  45
                                      Alternative Investment Return Calculations  	                      46
                                      Relative Alternative Investment Returns and Survivorship Bias  	   52
                               Practice Problems  	                                                      58
                               Solutions  	                                                              61

Learning Module 3              Investments in Private Capital: Equity and Debt  	                        65
                               Introduction  	                                                           65
                               Private Equity Investment Characteristics  	                              68
                                     Private Equity Investment Categories  	                             69
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
iv                                                                                              Contents



                           Private Equity Exit Strategies  	                                         73
                           Risk–Return from Private Equity Investments  	                            77
                    Private Debt Investment Characteristics  	                                       79
                           Private Debt Categories  	                                                79
                           Risk–Return of Private Debt  	                                            82
                    Diversification Benefits of Private Capital  	                                   84
                    Practice Problems  	                                                             88
                    Solutions  	                                                                     90

Learning Module 4   Real Estate and Infrastructure  	                                                93
                    Introduction  	                                                                  93
                    Real Estate Features  	                                                          96
                           Real Estate Investments  	                                                97
                           Real Estate Investment Structures  	                                      98
                    Real Estate Investment Characteristics  	                                       102
                           Source of Returns  	                                                     103
                           Real Estate Investment Diversification Benefits  	                       105
                    Infrastructure Investment Features  	                                           107
                           Infrastructure Investments  	                                            107
                    Infrastructure Investment Characteristics  	                                    113
                           Infrastructure Diversification Benefits  	                               115
                    Practice Problems  	                                                            117
                    Solutions  	                                                                    119

Learning Module 5   Natural Resources  	                                                            121
                    Introduction  	                                                                 121
                    Natural Resources Investment Features  	                                        124
                           Land Investments vs. Real Estate  	                                      124
                           Features and Forms of Farmland and Timberland Investment  	              126
                    Commodity Investment Forms  	                                                   129
                           Commodity Investment Features  	                                         130
                           Distinguishing Characteristics of Commodity Investments  	               130
                           Basics of Commodity Pricing  	                                           132
                    Natural Resource Investment Risk, Return, and Diversification  	                135
                           Commodities  	                                                           136
                           Farmland and Timberland  	                                               137
                           Inflation Hedging and Diversification Benefits of Natural Resource
                               Investments  	                                                       138
                    Practice Problems  	                                                            142
                    Solutions  	                                                                    144

Learning Module 6   Hedge Funds  	                                                                  147
                    Introduction  	                                                                 147
                    Hedge Fund Investment Features  	                                               150
                          Equity Hedge Fund Strategies  	                                           152
                          Event-Driven Strategies  	                                                154
                          Relative Value Strategies  	                                              155
                          Opportunistic Strategies  	                                               156
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Contents                                                                                              v



                                      Distinguishing Characteristics of Hedge Fund Investments  	   157
                               Hedge Fund Investment Forms  	                                       160
                                      Direct Hedge Fund Investment Forms  	                         160
                                      Indirect Hedge Fund Investment Forms  	                       162
                               Hedge Fund Investment Risk, Return, and Diversification  	           167
                                      Hedge Fund Investment Risks and Returns  	                    169
                                      Diversification Benefits of Hedge Fund Investments  	         171
                               Practice Problems  	                                                 174
                               Solutions  	                                                         176

Learning Module 7              Introduction to Digital Assets  	                                    177
                               Introduction  	                                                      177
                               Distributed Ledger Technology  	                                     181
                                      Proof of Work vs. Proof of Stake  	                           183
                                      Permissioned and Permissionless Networks  	                   184
                                      Types of Digital Assets  	                                    185
                               Digital Asset Investment Features  	                                 188
                                      Distinguishing Characteristics of Digital Assets  	           189
                                      Investible Digital Assets  	                                  191
                               Digital Asset Investment Forms  	                                    195
                                      Direct Digital Asset Investment Forms  	                      198
                                      Indirect Digital Asset Investment Forms  	                    199
                                      Digital Forms of Investment for Non-Digital Assets  	         201
                               Digital Asset Investment Risk, Return, and Diversification  	        203
                                      Digital Asset Investment Risks and Returns  	                 204
                                      Diversification Benefits of Digital Asset Investments  	      205
                               Practice Problems  	                                                 207
                               Solutions  	                                                         209

                               Glossary  	                                                          G-1
© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
                                                                                             vii



                                   How to Use the CFA
                                  Program Curriculum
The CFA® Program exams measure your mastery of the core knowledge, skills, and
abilities required to succeed as an investment professional. These core competencies
are the basis for the Candidate Body of Knowledge (CBOK™). The CBOK consists of
four components:
       A broad outline that lists the major CFA Program topic areas (www​
       .cfainstitute​.org/​programs/​cfa/​curriculum/​cbok/​cbok)
       Topic area weights that indicate the relative exam weightings of the top-level
       topic areas (www​.cfainstitute​.org/​en/​programs/​cfa/​curriculum)
       Learning outcome statements (LOS) that advise candidates about the
       specific knowledge, skills, and abilities they should acquire from curricu-
       lum content covering a topic area: LOS are provided at the beginning of
       each block of related content and the specific lesson that covers them. We
       encourage you to review the information about the LOS on our website
       (www​.cfainstitute​.org/​programs/​cfa/​curriculum/​study​-sessions), including
       the descriptions of LOS “command words” on the candidate resources page
       at www​.cfainstitute​.org/​-/​media/​documents/​support/​programs/​cfa​-and​
       -cipm​-los​-command​-words​.ashx.
       The CFA Program curriculum that candidates receive access to upon exam
       registration
    Therefore, the key to your success on the CFA exams is studying and understanding
the CBOK. You can learn more about the CBOK on our website: www​.cfainstitute​
.org/​programs/​cfa/​curriculum/​cbok.
    The curriculum, including the practice questions, is the basis for all exam questions.
The curriculum is selected or developed specifically to provide candidates with the
knowledge, skills, and abilities reflected in the CBOK.




CFA INSTITUTE LEARNING ECOSYSTEM (LES)
Your exam registration fee includes access to the CFA Institute Learning Ecosystem
(LES). This digital learning platform provides access, even offline, to all the curriculum
content and practice questions. The LES is organized as a series of learning modules
consisting of short online lessons and associated practice questions. This tool is your
source for all study materials, including practice questions and mock exams. The LES
is the primary method by which CFA Institute delivers your curriculum experience.
Here, candidates will find additional practice questions to test their knowledge. Some
questions in the LES provide a unique interactive experience.




DESIGNING YOUR PERSONAL STUDY PROGRAM
An orderly, systematic approach to exam preparation is critical. You should dedicate
a consistent block of time every week to reading and studying. Review the LOS both
before and after you study curriculum content to ensure you can demonstrate the
       © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
viii                                                 How to Use the CFA Program Curriculum


       knowledge, skills, and abilities described by the LOS and the assigned reading. Use
       the LOS as a self-check to track your progress and highlight areas of weakness for
       later review.
           Successful candidates report an average of more than 300 hours preparing for each
       exam. Your preparation time will vary based on your prior education and experience,
       and you will likely spend more time on some topics than on others.




       ERRATA
       The curriculum development process is rigorous and involves multiple rounds of
       reviews by content experts. Despite our efforts to produce a curriculum that is free of
       errors, in some instances, we must make corrections. Curriculum errata are periodically
       updated and posted by exam level and test date on the Curriculum Errata webpage
       (www​.cfainstitute​.org/​en/​programs/​submit​-errata). If you believe you have found an
       error in the curriculum, you can submit your concerns through our curriculum errata
       reporting process found at the bottom of the Curriculum Errata webpage.




       OTHER FEEDBACK
       Please send any comments or suggestions to info@​cfainstitute​.org, and we will review
       your feedback thoughtfully.
   © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.




Alternative Investments
© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.




LEARNING MODULE


1
Alternative Investment Features,
Methods, and Structures
 LEARNING OUTCOMES
  Mastery     The candidate should be able to:

              describe features and categories of alternative investments
              compare direct investment, co-investment, and fund investment
              methods for alternative investments
              describe investment ownership and compensation structures
              commonly used in alternative investments




INTRODUCTION
Alternative Investments are grouped together not because they have similar features
                                                                                              1
but instead because they have characteristics distinct from traditional investments.
Investing in alternatives can be done through fund investing, co-investing, or direct
investing. Alternative investments typically offer investors greater diversification and
higher expected returns than traditional investments but often involve longer-term,
illiquid investments in less efficient markets. Investing in alternatives requires special-
ized knowledge. Alternative investments typically rely on more complex and richer
compensation structures than traditional investments in order to better align manager
and investor incentives over longer periods.

   LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW

       ■   Alternative investments are investments other than ownership
           of traditional asset classes (public equity and fixed-income
           instruments and cash) and include private capital, real assets, and
           hedge funds.
       ■   Private capital includes private equity and private debt. Real assets
           include real estate, infrastructure, and natural resources. Hedge funds
           may invest across both traditional and alternative asset classes and
           are distinguished by their investment approach, which often includes
           leverage, derivatives, or other strategies.
                        © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
4   Learning Module 1                                Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures


                               ■   Investors often consider alternative investments in pursuit of greater
                                   portfolio diversification and/or increased expected returns. In doing
                                   so, they usually face longer investment periods, reduced liquidity, and
                                   less efficient markets than for more traditional assets.
                               ■   Alternative investment fund investors fully outsource the control and
                                   management of investments in exchange for relatively high fees, while
                                   co-investment and direct investment methods involve greater inves-
                                   tor effort and control over the selection and management of assets in
                                   exchange for relatively lower fees.
                               ■   Another common type of alternative investment structure is a limited
                                   partnership in which responsibilities are flexibly allocated between
                                   investors and managers—with managers as general partners and
                                   investors as limited partners. Limited partnerships usually have more
                                   complex compensation structures, which include both management
                                   and performance fees.
                               ■   Additional alternative investment structures include trusts and limited
                                   liability companies.



                         LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT


                           1. Identify which of the following choices is most likely an alternative
                              investment:
                               A. An investment in a hedge fund focused on traditional assets
                               B. Shares in a manufacturing firm traded on the Bursa Malaysia exchange
                               C. A euro foreign exchange future purchased on the Chicago Mercantile
                                  exchange
                              Solution:
                              The correct answer is A. An investment in a hedge fund, even one that
                              purchases traditional exchange-traded assets, is considered an alternative
                              investment. B is incorrect because shares traded on a public exchange, such
                              as the Bursa Malaysia exchange, are considered traditional, not alternative,
                              investments. C is incorrect because a euro foreign exchange future pur-
                              chased on a public exchange, such as the Chicago Mercantile exchange, is
                              considered a traditional, not an alternative, investment.

                           2. An advantage of investing in alternative investments most likely is:
                               A. high liquidity.
                               B. low investment fees.
                               C. higher expected returns.
                              Solution:
                              The correct answer is C. Investors are often attracted to alternative invest-
                              ments seeking greater diversification and/or higher expected returns. A is
                              incorrect because investors usually face longer investment periods, reduced
                              liquidity, and less efficient markets with alternative investments than with
                              more traditional assets. B is incorrect because alternative investments often
                              carry higher fees, including performance and/or incentive fees.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Introduction                                                                            5


  3. Investors with limited experience most likely enter into alternative invest-
     ments through:
      A. co-investing.
      B. fund investing.
      C. direct investing.
     Solution:
     The correct answer is B. Investors with limited resources and/or experience
     generally enter into alternative investments through fund investing, where
     the investor contributes capital to a fund and the fund identifies, selects, and
     makes investments on the investor’s behalf. A is incorrect because co-in-
     vesting is more appropriate for investors who already have some experience
     investing in funds; in co-investing, the investor invests in assets indirectly
     through the fund but also possesses rights (known as co-investment rights)
     to invest directly in the same assets. C is incorrect because direct invest-
     ing, which occurs when an investor makes a direct investment in an asset
     without the use of an intermediary, is typically reserved for larger and more
     sophisticated investors.

  4. When an investor invests in an asset without the use of an intermediary, it is
     called:
      A. co-investing.
      B. fund investing.
      C. direct investing.
     Solution:
     The correct answer is C. In direct investing, an investor makes a direct
     investment in an asset without the use of an intermediary. A is incorrect
     because in co-investing, an investor invests in assets indirectly through a
     fund but also possesses rights (known as co-investment rights) to invest
     directly in the same assets. B is incorrect because for fund investing, an in-
     vestor contributes capital to a fund and the fund, not the investor, identifies,
     selects, and makes investments on the investor’s behalf.

  5. Which statement regarding alternative investment partnership structures is
     most accurate?
      A. The fund manager has limited liability for anything that goes wrong.
      B. The fund manager is a limited partner, and investors are general
         partners.
      C. Investors’ upfront cash outflow can be a small portion of their total
         commitment to the partnership.
     Solution:
     The correct answer is C. Limited partners (LPs) are outside investors who
     own a fractional interest in the partnership based on the amount of their
     initial investment and the terms set out in the partnership documentation.
     LPs commit to future investments, and their upfront cash outflow can be a
     small portion of their total commitment to the fund. A is incorrect because
     the fund manager is the fund’s general partner (GP) who runs the business
     and theoretically bears unlimited liability for anything that goes wrong. B
     is incorrect because the fund manager is the fund’s general partner, not a
     limited partner, and the investors are the limited partners.
                        © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
6   Learning Module 1                                Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures


                           6. After failing to meet the hurdle rate, which of the following would a general
                              partner still most likely receive as compensation?
                                A. Carried interest
                                B. Management fee
                                 C. Committed capital
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is B. Alternative investment funds are usually structured
                                with a management fee typically ranging from 1% to 2% of assets under
                                management (e.g., for hedge funds) or 1% to 2% of committed capital (e.g.,
                                for private equity funds). (Committed capital is the total amount of money
                                that the limited partners have committed to the fund’s future investments.)
                                A performance fee (also referred to as an incentive fee, carried interest, or
                                carry) is applied based on excess returns. The partnership agreement usually
                                specifies that the performance fee is earned only after the fund achieves a
                                return known as a “hurdle rate.” The hurdle rate is a minimum rate of return
                                that the general partner must exceed in order to earn the performance fee.
                                A is incorrect because “carried interest” is another name for a performance
                                fee, which is earned only after the fund achieves its hurdle rate. C is in-
                                correct because committed capital is the total amount of money that the
                                limited partners have committed to the fund’s future investments, not a fee
                                to the general partner.




            2           ALTERNATIVE INVESTMENT FEATURES

                                        describe features and categories of alternative investments

                        Alternative investments are investments other than ownership of public equity secu-
                        rities, fixed-income instruments, or cash that represent the more traditional asset
                        classes. These investments are referred to as alternatives to traditional asset classes
                        because of their characteristics and the way they are structured. Investors are often
                        attracted to alternative investments when seeking greater diversification and/or higher
                        expected returns in exchange for what are often longer-term, illiquid investments in
                        less efficient markets. The features of these investments necessitate specific skills and
                        information to evaluate their performance and include unique factors investors must
                        consider if adding them to a portfolio.


                        Alternative Investments: Features and Categories
                        Some alternative investment features are shared with traditional public debt and
                        equity securities, while others are significantly different. Features that may distinguish
                        alternative investments include the following:
                            ■    The need for specialized knowledge to value cash flows and risks
                            ■    Typically low correlation of returns with more traditional asset classes
                            ■    Illiquidity, long investment time horizons, and large capital outlays
                            These features lead to the following alternative investment characteristics:
                            ■    Different investment structures due to the challenges of direct investment
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Features                                                              7


    ■   Incentive-based fees to address/minimize information asymmetry between
        managers and investors
    ■   Performance appraisal challenges
    For example, while many alternative investments have equity or debt characteris-
tics, they often require a larger or longer financial commitment due to an underlying
investment’s extended life cycle or different investment methods and vehicles used
to align the capabilities and incentives of managers and investors over time. Unlike
individual securities, the size and type of some alternative investments may also be
prohibitively large for certain investors. For these reasons, most investors limit alter-
native investments to that portion of their portfolio designated to fund obligations
several years in the future. Sophisticated investors with the longest investment time
horizons, such as large pension funds, sovereign wealth funds, and not-for-profit
endowments, tend to allocate a larger share of their portfolio to these assets.
    Alternative investment categories include private capital, real assets, and hedge
funds.


Private Capital
Private Capital is a broad term for funding provided to companies that is sourced from
neither the public equity nor the public debt markets. Capital that is provided in the
form of equity investments is called private equity, whereas capital that is provided
as a loan or other form of debt is called private debt.
     Private equity and private debt are alternative investments with features similar to
public equity and public debt. For example, both private and public equity investors
are company owners with residual claims to future cash flows and dividends. However,
while investors in private equity may have full access to company information and
latitude to influence day-to-day management and strategy decisions, investors in pub-
licly traded equity receive only publicly available information, such as annual reports
and periodic financial statements, with voting rights limited to decisions requiring
shareholder approval.
     Private equity refers to investment in privately owned companies or in public
companies with the intent to take them private. In general, private equity is used in
the mature life cycle stage or for firms in decline,with leveraged buyouts being a key
approach. Private equity managers often use the greater control and flexibility of private
versus public ownership to make management and strategy changes, including closing,
selling, or reorganizing lines of business to increase profitability over a several-year
period. Venture capital is a specialized form of private equity whereby ownership
capital is used for non-public companies in the early life cycle or startup phase, where
often an idea or business plan exists with a limited operation or customer base.

EXAMPLE 1

   Venture Capital vs. Private Equity
   Heartfield Digital is an early-stage digital media venture established 18 months
   ago. Heartfield plans to convert conventional music and art collection rights to
   digital form for sale and distribution. Its founders are seeking early-stage investors
   in order to conduct market research, build partnerships, and initiate operations.
       In contrast, Arguston Inc. is a mid-sized manufacturing firm in a mature
   industry that is experiencing a decline in profitability. Arguston’s share price has
   stagnated, and given its high-cost structure and dwindling operating cash flow,
   Arguston lacks the scale to make necessary technological upgrades to main-
   tain competitiveness. A prospective private equity investor might consider an
                        © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
8   Learning Module 1                                Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures


                           investment plan to restructure Arguston’s operations, acquire a smaller compet-
                           itor, and/or create efficiencies, perhaps by updating the plant and equipment. In
                           several years, Arguston may emerge as a more profitable independent company
                           or as an attractive acquisition target for a competitor.
                               Technically, venture capital (VC) is a form of private equity. The main
                           difference is that while private equity investors prefer stable companies, VC
                           investors usually come in during the startup phase. Venture capital is usually
                           given to small companies with huge growth potential, such as Heartfield Digital,
                           while broader types of private equity financing would be more appropriate for
                           a mature firm, such as Arguston.

                            For private debt, in addition to private loans or bonds, venture debt is extended
                        to early-stage firms with little or no cash flow, while distressed debt (introduced in
                        a separate fixed-income lesson) involves public or private debt of corporate issuers
                        believed to be close to or in bankruptcy that could benefit from investors with capital
                        restructuring skills.


                        Real Assets
                        In contrast to financial assets, real assets generally are tangible physical assets,
                        such as real estate (for example, land or buildings) and natural resources, but also
                        include such intangibles as patents, intellectual property, and goodwill. Real assets
                        either generate current or expected future cash flows and/or are considered a store
                        of value. Real estate includes borrowed or ownership capital in buildings or land.
                        Developed land includes commercial and industrial real estate, residential real estate,
                        and infrastructure. Commercial real estate includes land and buildings where private
                        business activity is the primary cash flow source, whereas residential real estate’s cash
                        flows stem from rents or mortgage payments by households. Publicly traded forms of
                        real estate include real estate investment trusts (REITS), which are issuers of equity
                        securities, and mortgage-backed debt securities, which are introduced and discussed
                        in a fixed-income lesson.
                             Infrastructure is a special type of real asset that typically involves land, buildings
                        and other long-lived fixed assets that are intended for public use and provide essen-
                        tial services. Bridges and toll roads are common examples of tangible infrastructure
                        assets. Infrastructure may be developed either solely by governments or through a
                        public–private partnership (PPP)in which private investors also have a stake. For
                        example, a public–private partnership might be used in order to attract long-term
                        private investment for a broadband internet investment. Infrastructure assets create
                        cash flows either directly in the form of fees, leases, or other compensation for access
                        rights or indirectly by promoting economic growth and supporting a government’s
                        ability to generate increased tax revenue on future economic activity. When private
                        investors are involved, a contract known as a concession agreement usually gov-
                        erns the investor’s obligations to construct and maintain infrastructure as well as the
                        exclusive right to operate and earn fees for a pre-determined period.

                         EXAMPLE 2

                           Public–Private Partnership for Infrastructure Projects in
                           Indonesia
                           PT Indonesia Infrastructure Finance (IIF) is a private national company estab-
                           lished in 2010 by the government of Indonesia to accelerate and improve pri-
                           vate participation in infrastructure development in Indonesia. Together with
                           the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and other institutions, the IIF
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Features                                                            9


  provides infrastructure financing and advisory services for commercially viable
  infrastructure projects. This approach has facilitated development of PPP projects,
  increased equity investment in Indonesian infrastructure projects, and increased
  institutional awareness and capacity to implement environmental, health, and
  safety and social issues. Looking ahead, the IIF anticipates the need to spend
  USD150 billion over a five-year period to construct power plants and toll roads.
  While the government will be able to fund 30% of this cost, the remainder will
  be financed by the private sector through PPPs.

    Natural resources involve either less developed land, which itself is the source
of economic value, or naturally occurring standardized products that are harvested,
extracted, and/or refined. Less developed land includes farmland, timberland, or land
for exploration for natural resource deposits, such as minerals or energy. Sources of
return for these types of less developed land include expected price appreciation over
time and cash flows. For example, farmland generates crop yields or agricultural lease
payments, future timber harvests generate timberland income, and mineral or drill-
ing rights to extract and refine natural resources can provide income. In some cases,
these investments may be considered for environmental, social, and governance (ESG)
purposes—for example, when promoting sustainable farming practices for agriculture
or creating carbon offsets for timberland, as in the following example.

EXAMPLE 3

  Using Timberland to Create Carbon Offsets
  Companies eager to offset emissions are paying timberland owners not to cut
  acres of trees. Growing trees absorb carbon in the atmosphere.
      ■   Companies that pay timber owners not to harvest trees receive credits
          in the form of carbon offsets. Large companies, which inevitably
          generate emissions in the course of doing business, can fund car-
          bon offsets to demonstrate to their investors, customers, and others
          (including regulators) that they are serious about reducing pollution
          and helping the environment.
      ■   For large and small owners of timberland, choosing not to harvest
          makes sense, too. Their trees continue to grow, leading to higher
          future volumes of timber, and they earn non-timber income in the
          meantime.
     In other cases, undeveloped land may also have future potential for com-
  mercial, residential, or infrastructure development.

    Standardized, traded goods known as commodities include plant, animal, energy,
and mineral products used in goods and services production. Commodities do not
themselves generate cash flows but, rather, are ultimately sold by commodity producers
to commodity consumers for economic use. Investors seek to benefit from commodity
price changes based on their future economic use as well as a lower correlation of
returns versus other asset classes over the economic cycle. With their lower correlation
of returns with other asset classes, commodities also can serve as a countercyclical
holding and as an inflation hedge.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
10   Learning Module 1                                Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures


                          EXAMPLE 4

                            Rising Demand for Lithium, an Increasingly Important
                            Commodity
                            Demand for lithium is growing rapidly as demand for electric vehicles (EVs)
                            climbs. Lithium is popular with battery manufacturers because, as the least
                            dense metal, it stores a large proportion of energy relative to its weight.
                                The sales of battery electric and plug-in hybrid electric cars exceeded 2
                            million for the first time in 2019. China dominates this market, accounting for
                            more than half of all current EV sales worldwide. An industry source has forecast
                            that EV sales will grow from 2.5 million in 2020 to approximately 11 million in
                            2025 and will exceed 30 million by 2030, garnering approximately 32% of the
                            total market share for new car sales at that time.
                                Demand for lithium will rise accordingly. The growth in lithium demand is
                            expected to foster new lithium mining and more production in more countries
                            worldwide.

                            Other real alternative assets include tangible collectible assets, such as fine art,
                         wine, rare coins, watches, and other rare assets, as well as intangible assets, such as
                         patents, and litigation, and so-called digital assets. “Digital assets” is the umbrella
                         term covering assets that can be created, stored, and transmitted electronically and
                         have associated ownership or use rights.

                          DIGITAL ASSETS

                            The term “digital assets” covers a wide variety of assets, such as cryptocurrencies,
                            tokens (security and utility), and digital collectables (such as digital art). The
                            following diagram provides a simple breakdown of digital assets.
                                Digital Assets diagram

                                                                                 Bitcoin
                                                                                                  Stablecoins
                                                        Cryptocurrencies        Altcoins
                                                                                                  Meme coins
                                                                           Central Bank Digital
                                                                               Currencies
                                       Digital Assets
                                                                             Non-Fungible
                                                                                Tokens

                                                            Tokens          Security Tokens

                                                                              Utility Token

                                Cryptocurrency and tokens utilize cryptography, an advanced encryption
                            technique that assures the authenticity of crypto assets. The key difference
                            between these two classes of digital asset is that cryptocurrencies have their
                            own blockchains, whereas crypto tokens are built on an existing blockchain.
                                For example, cryptocurrencies are the native asset of a blockchain—such
                            as Bitcoin (BTC) or Ethereum (ETH). However, tokens are created as part of
                            a platform that is built on an existing blockchain, such as the many ERC-20
                            tokens that make up the Ethereum ecosystem. The Ethereum ecosystem is used
                            as a network for decentralized applications, such as non-fungible token (NFT)
                            marketplaces and decentralized finance (DeFi) projects.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Features                                                          11


    Digital assets are covered in more detail in a subsequent alternative invest-
  ments learning module.



Hedge Funds
Hedge funds are private investment vehicles that may invest in public equities or
publicly traded fixed-income assets, private capital, and/or real assets, but they are
distinguished by their investment approach rather than by the investments them-
selves. Hedge funds make frequent use of leverage, derivatives, short selling, and
other investment strategies, which often results in a substantially different risk and
return profile from that of merely buying and holding the underlying assets in an
investment portfolio. Investors may also invest in a portfolio of hedge funds, often
referred to as a fund of funds.

QUESTION SET


  1. Tangible physical assets that generate current or expected future
     cash flows and/or are considered a store of value are best labeled as:
      A. real assets.
      B. private equity.
      C. venture capital.
     Solution:
     The correct answer is A. In contrast to financial assets, real assets are
     generally tangible physical assets that generate current or expected future
     cash flows and/or are considered a store of value. Major categories of real
     assets include real estate and natural resources, as well as intangibles such
     as patents. B is incorrect because private equity, considered an alternative
     investment, is non-publicly traded capital that is invested directly in private
     companies (or in public companies that are being taken private). It is typi-
     cally used to invest in firms in the mature life-cycle stage or in decline. C is
     incorrect because venture capital is ownership capital used for non-public
     companies in their early life cycle or startup phase.

  2. Contrast private equity and venture capital.
     Solution:
     Private capital is used at different times in a company’s life cycle and in
     different forms. Most private equity is used in the mature life cycle stage or
     for firms in decline. Private equity managers often use the greater control
     and flexibility of private versus public ownership to make management and
     strategy changes including closing, selling, or reorganizing lines of business
     to increase profitability over a several-year period. In contrast, venture
     capital is used for non-public companies with high growth potential in their
     early life cycle or startup phase. Venture capital is essentially a specialized
     form of private equity; it represents a small portion of the entire private
     equity market by value.

  3. Identify which statement about a digital asset is most accurate. A digital
     asset:
      A. includes digital art but not cryptocurrencies.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
12   Learning Module 1                                Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures


                                 B. is anything that can be stored and transmitted electronically and has
                                    associated ownership or use rights.
                                  C. must adhere to very specific designs or requirements in order to work
                                     within the limited types of technology that support it.
                                 Solution:
                                 The correct answer is B. Digital assets continue to evolve and vary in terms
                                 of design and application. Digital assets can be thought of as anything that
                                 can be stored and transmitted electronically and has associated ownership
                                 or use rights. A is incorrect because digital assets include cryptocurrencies,
                                 tokens (security and utility), and digital collectables (such as digital art). C is
                                 incorrect because digital assets may take many forms (such as digital tokens
                                 and virtual currencies) and may use various underlying technologies. They
                                 are not limited to specific designs or technology.

                            4. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks: Alternative invest-
                               ment categories include _______________, _________________, and
                               ______________.
                                 Solution:
                                 Alternative investment categories include private capital, real assets, and
                                 hedge funds.




             3           ALTERNATIVE INVESTMENT METHODS

                                         compare direct investment, co-investment, and fund investment
                                         methods for alternative investments

                         Investors seeking greater diversification and higher expected returns from alternative
                         investments must consider how best to enter into such an investment. The long-term,
                         illiquid nature of many alternative investments along with the specialized knowledge
                         involved in evaluating and overseeing these investments make investors more depen-
                         dent on manager decisions over longer time periods. Large, sophisticated investors can
                         address this issue by taking greater control over the investment process, while other,
                         less sophisticated investors must outsource this process and seek to align manager
                         incentives with investor objectives.


                         Alternative Investment Methods
                         Investors can access alternative investments in three ways:
                             ■    Fund investment (such as a in a PE fund)
                             ■    Co-investment into a portfolio company of a fund
                             ■    Direct investment into a company or project (such as infrastructure or real
                                  estate)
                             Institutional investors typically begin investing in alternative investments via
                         funds. Then, as they gain experience, they may begin to invest via co-investing and
                         direct investing. The largest and most sophisticated direct investors (such as some
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Methods                                                                      13


sovereign wealth funds) compete with fund managers for access to the best investment
opportunities. Exhibit 1 shows an illustration of the three methods of investing in
alternative investments. We will refer to this exhibit several times during this lesson.



  Exhibit 1: Three Methods of Investing in Alternative Assets

                                  Investor




                                        Fund Investing




                                                                                 Direct Investing
                                                                Co-Investing
                           Alternative Investments
                                     Fund



            Investment 1        Investment 2             Investment 3          Investment A




Fund Investment
Investors with limited resources and/or experience generally enter into alternative
investments through fund investing, where the investor contributes capital to a fund
and the fund identifies, selects, and makes investments on the investor’s behalf. For
the fund’s services, the investor is charged a management fee, plus a performance fee
if the fund manager delivers superior results versus a hurdle rate or benchmark. In
Exhibit 1, the investor invests in the “alternative investments fund.” The fund itself
invests in three investments: Investments 1, 2, and 3. Fund investing can be viewed
as an indirect method of investing in alternative assets.
     Fund investors have little or no leeway in the sense that their investment decisions
are limited to either investing in the fund or not. Fund investors typically have neither
the sophistication nor the experience to invest directly on their own. Furthermore,
fund investors are typically unable to affect the fund’s underlying investments. Note
that fund investing is available for all major alternative investment types, including
hedge funds, private capital, real estate, infrastructure, and natural resources.
     Allocation to alternative assets requires distinct specialized skills that many
investors likely do not possess. These investors can achieve this exposure through
fund investing, where one or more investors contribute capital to an investment
management company that identifies, selects, manages, and monitors investments
on the investors’ behalf, as shown in Exhibit 2.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
14   Learning Module 1                                Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures



                            Exhibit 2: Alternative Investment Fund Structure

                                          Investor 1                    Investor 2                    Investor 3
                                                         Capital Committed
                                                             over Time


                                                                      Alternative
                                                                  Investments Fund

                                                          Manager Selects
                                                           Investments
                                                             over Time

                                          Investment 1                Investment 2              Investment 3


                                                                                                    Gross Returns


                                                                      Alternative                   Management Fee
                                                                  Investments Fund                  Performance Fee


                                                               Net
                                                             Returns


                                          Investor 1                    Investor 2                    Investor 3




                            A. Investments

                                                           Investor

                                                                 A

                                                                                        B                      C
                                                           Alternative
                                                       Investments Fund




                               Investment 1              Investment 2                Investment 3              Investment X
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Methods                                                                  15



  B. Returns

                  Investment 1              Investment 2         Investment 3

                                      A


                                              Alternative               C
                                          Investments Fund


                                      B


                Investor 1                   Investor 2              Investor 3




Fund investment structures for alternative investments differ substantially from
traditional public equity and fixed-income fund or ETF investments. For example,
alternative funds usually involve (1) the pre-commitment of funds prior to investment
selection and an extended period during which the fund may not be sold, (2) higher
management fees with more complex fee structures, and (3) less frequent transparency
on periodic returns and fund positions versus equity or fixed-income funds. Investors
in alternative funds therefore usually compensate managers using a performance-based,
as opposed to flat, fee structure to better align manager and investor incentives over
longer periods. Important terms are provided in a term sheet; a sample term sheet for
fund investment with Tenderledge Investments LLC is provided in Exhibit 3. Further
details of these terms are discussed in subsequent lessons.



  Exhibit 3: Tenderledge Investment Fund VIII Limited Partner Agreement
  Term Sheet

 Tenderledge Investment Fund VIII, L.P.
 Term Sheet
Fund                         Tenderledge Investment Fund VIII, L.P
General Partner              Tenderledge Investment LLC
Fund Manager                 Tenderledge Investments
Maximum Size                 Not to exceed USD750 million
                             Equal to at least 2% of the aggregate Commitments of the
General Partner’s            Limited Partners
Commitment                   The date the General Partner determines that aggregate
Initial Closing Date         Commitments equal or exceed USD500 million
Final Closing Date           Twelve (12) months from the Initial Closing Date
Term of the Fund             Ten (10) years from the Initial Closing Date
Investment Policy            To provide attractive, long-term investment return from a diver-
                             sified portfolio of alternative investments
ESG                          In accordance with the General Partner’s environmental, social,
                             and governance policy
Management Fee               1.5% per annum of the commitment of each limited partner
Hurdle Rate                  A hard hurdle rate of 10%
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
16   Learning Module 1                                Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures



                          Tenderledge Investment Fund VIII, L.P.
                          Term Sheet
                         Performance Fee           20% of fund returns in excess of the specified hard hurdle rate
                         Side Letters              If any Side Letter grants more favorable rights to any Partner
                                                   than those provided to other Partners, the more favorable rights
                                                   will be granted to all other Partners




                         Co-Investment
                         Once investors have some experience investing in funds, prior to investing directly
                         themselves, many investors gain direct investing experience via co-investing, where the
                         investor invests in assets indirectly through the fund but also possesses rights (known
                         as co-investment rights) to invest directly in the same assets. Through co-investing,
                         an investor is able to make an investment alongside a fund when the fund identifies
                         deals; the investor is not limited to participating in the deal solely by investing in the
                         fund. Exhibit 1 illustrates the co-investing method: The investor invests in one deal
                         (labeled “Investment 3”) indirectly via fund investing while investing an additional
                         amount directly via a co-investment. Co-investing allows investors to expand their
                         investment knowledge, skills, and experience beyond what they would gain from taking
                         a fund-only investment approach. Co-investing also provides investors access to an
                         investment opportunity at a lower fee than they would owe as fund-only investors in
                         the same asset. Co-investors can learn from the fund’s process to eventually pursue
                         direct investments themselves. Co-investors weigh the benefits of greater control and
                         lower fees versus higher oversight costs.
                             Managers benefit from choosing one or more co-investors to
                             ■   accelerate investment timing when available funds and expected inflows are
                                 insufficient for a specific deal,
                             ■   expand the scope of available new investments, and
                             ■   increase diversification of an existing pool of fund investments.


                          EXAMPLE 5

                            Co-Investment Opportunity
                            Moreton Bay Pension Plan is an investor in Tenderledge LLC Alternatives Fund.
                            Tenderledge has identified a take-private transaction in Fancy Roofing Co. that
                            requires a USD1.5 billion capital investment. However, the fund concentration
                            limit allows Tenderledge to invest only up to USD1 billion in any one investment.
                            Tenderledge offers the additional USD0.5 billion to Moreton Bay Pension Plan
                            and other investors in the fund as a co-investment on a reduced fee and no carry
                            basis. In this case, the co-investment allows Tenderledge the ability to secure
                            the investment without needing to bring an additional fund manager into the
                            transaction, and the co-investors gain additional exposure to Fancy Roofing
                            Company at a reduced management fee and zero performance fees.



                         Direct Investment
                         The largest, most sophisticated investors with sufficient skills and knowledge to
                         manage individual alternative investments often do so via direct investing without
                         the use of an intermediary, as previously shown in Exhibit 1 (labeled “Investment A”).
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Methods                                                            17


    Direct investors retain maximum flexibility and control when it comes to invest-
ment choice, methods of financing, and timing. In the case of private equity, this
involves the purchase of a direct stake in a private company without the use of a
fund managed by an external asset manager or general partner. It also requires the
direct investor to have the resources to provide the specialized knowledge, skills, and
oversight capabilities that direct investment requires. Although the direct investment
approach usually applies to private capital and real estate, some very large investors,
such as pensions and sovereign wealth funds, also invest directly in infrastructure
and natural resources.

EXAMPLE 6

  Direct Investment in Renewable Energy
  Singapore sovereign wealth fund GIC announced in 2021 that it will directly
  invest USD240 million in a Singapore-based energy firm, Arctic Green Energy,
  becoming an equity partner in the firm. The investment will help Arctic Green
  Energy expand its global operations and increase its capability in geothermal
  energy. Geothermal energy is derived from hot underground springs and is a
  renewable, economically competitive, and sustainable alternative to using fossil
  fuels for heating and cooling. Arctic Green Energy uses geothermal resources to
  generate power and produce clean heat. GIC has noted that investing sustainably
  is one of its core long-term investment mandates.


QUESTION SET


  1. Referring to the diagram below, identify the label that best corre-
     sponds to the three methods of investing in alternative assets:

                              Investor

                                   A

                                                          B            C
                             Alternative
                         Investments Fund




      Investment 1          Investment 2              Investment 3     Investment X

                                            ​




         A.                                     1. Co-investing
         B.                                     2. Fund investing
         C.                                     3. Direct investing
                                            ​




     Solution (as seen in Exhibit 1 of this lesson):
     A. 2 is correct. In fund investing, the investor contributes capital to a fund
     and the fund identifies, selects, and makes investments on the investor’s
     behalf.
     B. 1 is correct. In co-investing, the investor invests in assets indirectly
     through the fund but also possesses rights (known as co-investment rights)
     to invest directly in the same assets.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
18   Learning Module 1                                Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures


                               C. 3 is correct. In direct investing, an investor makes a direct investment
                               in an asset (labeled “Investment X” in the diagram) without the use of an
                               intermediary.

                            2. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks:The ________ and
                               ________ nature of many alternative investments and the _______________
                               required to evaluate and oversee these investments make investors more
                               dependent on manager decisions over longer time periods.
                               Solution:
                               The long-termand illiquid nature of many alternative investments and the
                               specialized knowledge required to evaluate and oversee these investments
                               make investors more dependent on manager decisions over longer time
                               periods.

                            3. Identify two reasons investment managers offer co-investment opportu-
                               nities to investors. Managers might choose to add co-investors for such
                               reasons as:

                                1.

                                2.
                               Solution:
                               Managers might choose to add co-investors for such reasons as:

                                ■    accelerating investment timing when available funds and expected
                                     inflows are insufficient for a specific deal.
                                ■    expanding the scope of available new investments.
                                ■    increasing diversification of an existing pool of fund investments.


                            4. Identify one reason an investor would elect to participate in each of the
                               following alternative investment methods:

                                1. Fund investing
                                2. Co-investing
                                3. Direct investing
                               Solution:
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Structures                                                               19


                                             ​




    1. Fund investing       Fund investing gives investors with limited resources or
                            experience an entrance into alternative investing.
    2. Co-investing         Investors who have better specific skills and greater ability
                            to allocate investments to individual assets may select a
                            more active investment approach while retaining manager
                            involvement. This results in lower fees for the investor
                            than for a purely fund-based approach. Also, co-investors
                            select and manage an investment jointly with a general
                            fund manager, which potentially gives them greater
                            control and higher returns than they could earn in a
                            fund-only structure.
    3. Direct investing     Direct investing offers investors flexibility and control
                            when it comes to choosing their investments, selecting
                            their preferred methods of financing, and planning their
                            approach.
                                             ​




ALTERNATIVE INVESTMENT STRUCTURES
                                                                                            4
              describe investment ownership and compensation structures
              commonly used in alternative investments

Beyond the direct or indirect method of investing in alternatives, the illiquidity, com-
plexity, and long-term nature of these investments require more complex structures to
bridge potential gaps between manager and investor interests. Alternative investment
structures may explicitly address both the roles and responsibilities of investors and
managers to address these gaps. In addition, alternative investment structures tailor
the distribution of returns between these two parties to better align the incentives
(or interests) between manager and investor.
    For example, managers may require investors to be responsible for future capital
contributions, while investors may place restrictions on manager investment selection
to avoid conflicts of interest or hostile takeovers among other investment criteria.
Performance-based compensation structures, which can include minimum return
requirements for investors, delayed payouts, and/or the ability to reclaim incentive
compensation in the event of poor fund performance, encourage managers to maxi-
mize returns in the best interest of investors.


Alternative Investment Ownership and Compensation
Structures
In this section, we discuss the ownership and compensation structures of alternative
investments.


Ownership Structures
Alternative investment vehicles often take the form of partnerships in order to maxi-
mize flexibility in the investment structure to allocate business risk and return and to
distribute special responsibilities between investors and managers as required. Limited
partnerships, introduced in a corporate issuer lesson, involve at least one general
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
20   Learning Module 1                                Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures


                         partner (GP) with theoretically unlimited liability who is responsible for managing the
                         fund. Limited partners (LPs) are outside investors who own a fractional interest in the
                         partnership based on the amount of their initial investment and the terms set out in the
                         partnership documentation. Exhibit 4 shows the basic GP/LP structure together with
                         the various investment approaches (fund, co-investment, direct) introduced earlier.



                            Exhibit 4: Basic GP/LP Structure and Various Investment Approaches

                                  Fund Manager/                                          Investor/
                               General Partner (”GP”)                              Limited Partner (”LP”)




                                                                                                                                  Direct Investing
                                                                                     Fund Investing




                                                                                                                 Co-Investing
                                                                                       (indirect)
                                                    Alternative Investments
                                                              Fund




                                   Investment 1                   Investment 2           Investment 3                           Investment A




                         LPs commit to future investments, and the upfront cash outflow can be a small portion
                         of their total commitment to the fund. Funds set up as limited partnerships typically
                         have a limit on the number of LPs allowed to invest in the fund. LPs play passive roles
                         and are not involved with the management of the fund (although co-investment rights
                         allow for the LPs to make additional direct investments in the portfolio companies);
                         the operations and decisions of the fund are controlled solely by the GP.
                             Limited partners (LPs) have their liability capped at the amount of their investment
                         in the partnership, as shown in Exhibit 5.



                            Exhibit 5: Example Limited Partnership Structure

                                               Fund Manager/                                                 Investor/
                                            General Partner (”GP”)                                    Limited Partners (”LPs”)
                                                                                                       $80 million
                                                                                                       $50 million




                                                                                                       $50 million
                                                                                                       $90 million
                                                                                                       $70 million
                                                                                                       $75 million

                                                                                                       $75 million
                                                    $10 million




                                                                               $500 million
                                                                         Alternative Investments
                                                                                   Fund




                         A restricted number of limited partners hold a fractional interest in the fund. LP inves-
                         tors must generally meet certain minimum regulatory net worth, institutional, or other
                         requirements, as so-called accredited investors, to access these investments, which
                         are less regulated than general public offerings. The GP (Tenderledge Investments LLC
                         in Exhibit 6) agrees to manage the fund’s operations under an agreed standard of care
                         and perform such activities as buying or selling assets, borrowing funds, establishing
                         reserves, or entering into contracts on behalf of the fund.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Structures                                                                                                                21



  Exhibit 6: Limited Partnership (Tenderledge Investment Fund)

    Tenderledge Investments                              Investor/Limited
     LLC/General Partner (GP)                               Partner (LP)




                                                                                  Limited Liability
                                                                  Share in Risk
                                                                  and Returns




                                                                                                                              Direct Investing
                                                                   after Fees
          Management and                          Fund




                                                                                                      Co-Investing
           Incentive Fees                  Investing (indirect)

                             Tenderledge Investment
       Unlimited Liability
                                  Fund VIII, L.P.



          Investment 1            Investment 2            Investment 3                                                     Investment A




A GP may manage multiple funds at a time. A limited partnership agreement (LPA)
establishes terms of an LP as governed by a limited partnership agreement.
    Key features of an LPA include the distribution of profits and losses (covered in
detail below); manager roles and responsibilities, such as investment criteria and restric-
tions; and terms governing transfers, withdrawals, and dissolution of the agreement.
    Adjustments to LP terms are sometimes made to address the unique legal, regu-
latory, or reporting requirements of a specific investor. In this case, a supplemental
document known as a side letter is issued between a GP and one or more LPs with
terms that override or modify the original LPA terms. These terms might include such
features as increased investor ability to transfer investments to a related or successor
fund; first right of refusal and other similar clauses to outline potential treatment
(regarding fees, co-investment rights, secondary sales, and potentially other matters)
in comparison to other LPs; ability to forgo a contractual capital contribution (known
as an excusal right); or ability to receive additional investment reporting. One fea-
ture of a side letter might include a “most favored nation” clause ensuring any more
favorable or additional terms negotiated outside of the LPA with other investors will
also apply to a particular LP. The customized features of the LPA and any side letters
stand in contrast to a standardized indenture applicable to all bond investors in the
case of public fixed-income securities.
    Different specialized structures are commonly adopted for other alternative
investments. For example, infrastructure investors frequently enter into public–private
partnerships, which are agreements between the public sector and the private sector
to finance, build, and operate public infrastructure, as shown in Exhibit 7. Exhibit 8
shows the PPP structure for PT Indonesia Infrastructure Finance (IIF), as discussed
in Example 2.



  Exhibit 7: Public–Private Partnership

                                                 Public Sector
                    Provide services                                          Exclusive access,
                      and returns                                               technical and
                   assets at maturity            PPP Contract                   legal services

                               Project debt                          Project Equity
             Project                            Special Purpose                                                      Project Sponsors/
           Debtholders                              Entity                                                             Equity Holders
                                 Returns                                 Returns
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
22   Learning Module 1                                Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures



                            Exhibit 8: Public–Private Partnership Structure of IIF

                                                              Government of
                                                              the Republic of
                                          To fund 30% of        Indonesia         Exclusive access,
                                           project costs                            technical and
                                           USD45 billion       PPP Contract         legal services

                                                                PT Indonesia
                                                               Infrastructure
                                                                Finance (IIF)
                                                              To fund 70% of
                                                               project costs
                                                              USD105 billion
                                                               Private Sector
                                                                 Investors/
                                                               Shareholders




                         Infrastructure projects often involve a special purpose entity that raises borrowed
                         and ownership capital for the construction and operation of a specific road, bridge,
                         or other long-lived asset under the terms of a concession agreement, after which the
                         asset is sold or returned to a public sector entity.
                             Real estate or natural resource fund investors are often classified as unitholders in
                         what is referred to as a master limited partnership (MLP), which has similar features
                         to the limited partnership described earlier but is usually a more liquid investment that
                         is often publicly traded. Other forms of more liquid investments in alternative assets are
                         real estate investment trusts (REITs), commodity funds, and various exchange-traded
                         funds (ETFs). In the case of direct real estate investments, joint ventures are also a
                         common partnership structure. Infrastructure and real estate will be discussed further
                         in a subsequent alternative investment learning module.


                         Compensation Structures
                         The asymmetry in information between the general partner, with specialized knowl-
                         edge and control, and the limited partners in alternative investments means that more
                         complex compensation structures are usedto better align general and limited partner
                         incentives. Most funds that own public equity or debt securities charge management
                         fees as a fixed percentage of assets under management. Alternative investment funds,
                         in contrast, usually combine a higher management fee (often 1%–2% of assets under
                         management) with a performance fee (also referred to as an incentive fee or carried
                         interest) based on a percentage of periodic fund returns.
                              While hedge funds and REITs typically charge a management fee on assets under
                         management, private equity funds often levy this fee on committed capital, which
                         consists of the total amount that LPs have promised to fund future investments.
                         Private equity funds raise committed capital and draw down on those commitments,
                         generally over three to five years, when they have a specific investment to make. The
                         life of a typical private equity fund is 10 years. Note that the management fee is typi-
                         cally based on committed capital, not invested capital; the committed-capital basis for
                         management fees is an important distinction from hedge funds, whose management
                         fees are based on assets under management (AUM). Using committed capital as the
                         basis for management fee calculations reduces the incentive for GPs to deploy the
                         committed capital as quickly as possible (in order to increase near-term management
                         fees). This allows the GPs to be selective about deploying capital into investment
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Structures                                                          23


opportunities. In addition, since the GP has so much influence on the value of the
assets, it would be inappropriate to pay management fees on the basis of the value of
assets under management.
    Performance fees are often subject to a minimum fund return or hurdle rate
(also known as a “preferred return”), as well as other modifications, to align man-
ager incentives as closely as possible with those of investors over long investment
periods. Hurdle rate agreements sometimes distinguish between a hard hurdle rate,
where the manager earns fees on annual returns in excess of the hurdle rate, or a
soft hurdle rate, where the fee is calculated on the entire return when the hurdle
is exceeded. With a soft hurdle, GPs are able to catch up performance fees once the
hurdle threshold is exceeded.
    If we ignore management fees and assume a single-period fund rate of return of r,
a hard hurdle rate of rh, and a GP performance fee (p) as a percentage of total return,
then the GP’s rate of return (rGP) is as follows:
   rGP = max[0, p(r – rh)].                                                       (1)
For example, if a fund earns r of 18% over a period and receives a performance fee
of 20% (p) of returns in excess of the hurdle rate, rh, of 8%, then rGP is equal to 2%:
   2% = max[0, 20%(18% – 8%)].
Performance fee modifications include rewarding managers for exceeding the hurdle
rate or generating returns on specific deals or penalizing them by limiting or requiring
the return of performance fees for declining performance over time. The acceleration
of performance fees once a fund exceeds the soft hurdle rate is known as a catch-up
clause, as illustrated in Exhibit 9. Under the catch-up clause using the prior example,
the GP earns an immediate 2% (catch-up return of rcu) once the hurdle is exceeded,
resulting in a 1.6% higher return than without the catch-up feature. In other words,
the LP will receive 100% of all cash distributions until it earns the hurdle rate of 8%.
Then, the GP will receive 100% of distributions until the split of profit is 80%/20%.
The remaining distributions will be split 80%/20%. The GP’s rate of return (rGP) from
Equation 1 with a catch-up clause becomes
   rGP = max[0, rcu+ p(r − rh − rcu)].                                            (2)

   3.6% = max[0, 2.0% + 20%(18% – 8% – 2%)].
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
24   Learning Module 1                                Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures



                            Exhibit 9: Catch-Up Clause Illustration
                                                   A. GP Returns with a Catch-Up Clause

                                                                          1.6% GP
                                                                                            3.6%

                                                                          6.4% LP
                                                                                          LP earns
                                                            2.0%                           14.4%
                                                                                          GP earns
                                                                                           3.6% =
                                           8.0%                                           18% × 0.2


                                            LPs          GP catchup     Remaining 8%
                                                                         split 80/20

                                                  B. GP Returns without a Catch-Up Clause

                                                                          2.0% GP           2.0%

                                                                          8.0% LP
                                                                                          LP earns
                                                                                            16%
                                                                                          GP earns
                                                                                           2.0% =
                                           8.0%                                          (18% – 8%)
                                                                                            × 0.2


                                            LPs         No GP catchup   Remaining 10%
                                                                          split 80/20




                         In other instances, managers are penalized with fee reductions in cases of poor or
                         declining performance. One example of this in the case of hedge funds is the use
                         of a so-called high-water mark, which reflects the fund’s peak value as of a perfor-
                         mance calculation date net of fees. If the fund’s value subsequently declines below
                         the high-water mark, the hedge fund manager may not charge performance fees until
                         the fund value exceeds the previous high-water mark. The use of high-water marks
                         seeks to reward managers for sustained performance and protect LPs from paying
                         twice for the same returns.
                              A clawback provision, in contrast, actually grants LPs the right to reclaim a por-
                         tion of the GP’s performance fee. Clawback provisions are usually activated when a
                         GP exits successful deals early on but incurs losses on deals later in the fund’s life.
                         For most alternative investments, investor high-water marks carry over into new
                         calendar years, but in the case of hedge funds, an investor may no longer claw back
                         incentive fees paid for a prior calendar year if portfolio losses are incurred later. Given
                         the generally more illiquid and longer-term nature of their holdings, private equity
                         and real estate investments are more likely to contain clawback clauses for the entire
                         life of the portfolio.
                              Finally, as in the case of asset-backed securities described in fixed-income lessons,
                         alternative investments often use a waterfall structure to determine the distribution
                         of cash flows to GPs and LPs. In alternative investments, GPs usually receive a dispro-
                         portionately larger share of the total profits relative to their initial investment, which
                         incentivizes them to maximize profitability.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Structures                                                                                        25


   There are two types of waterfalls: deal-by-deal (or American) waterfalls and
whole-of-fund (or European) waterfalls.
     ■   Deal-by-deal waterfalls are more advantageous to the GP because perfor-
         mance fees are collected on a per-deal basis, allowing the GP to get paid
         before LPs receive both their initial investment and their preferred rate of
         return (i.e., the hurdle rate) on the entire fund.
     ■   In whole-of-fund waterfalls, all distributions go to the LPs as deals are
         exited and the GP does not participate in any profits until the LPs receive
         their initial investment and the hurdle rate has been met. In contrast to
         deal-by-deal waterfalls, whole-of-fund waterfalls occur at the aggregate fund
         level and are more advantageous to the LPs.
    Exhibit 10 and Exhibit 11 illustrate how the cash flow to the GP differs in a
deal-by-deal waterfall with a clawback provision versus a whole-of-fund waterfall,
respectively. In the first instance, the fund initially grants the GP payouts of $2 million,
$3 million, and $8 million because Investments 1, 2, and 3 generate a profit when sold.
However, all subsequent investments either break even or return a loss, meaning that
over the course of the fund’s life, it breaks even at an aggregate level. Thus, the GP
must return all early payouts, to compensate for subsequent losses.



    Exhibit 10: Deal-by-Deal (American) Waterfall Example—with Clawback Provision

                                Year                     Amount ($mm)                               Profit

Investment no.         Invested         Sold           Invested         Sold           $mm      %            GP at 20%

1                          1             4                $10           $20             $10    26.0%            $2
2                          2             5                $20           $35             $15    20.5%            $3
3                          2             7                $40           $80             $40    14.9%            $8
4                          3             7                $20           $20             —       —               —
5                          3             8                $35           $25            ($10)   neg             ($2)
6                          4             9                $25           $20            ($5)    neg             ($1)
7                          5             9                $30           $—             ($30)   neg             ($6)
8                          5             10               $20           $—             ($20)   neg             ($4)
Total                      1             10              $200           $200            —       —               —

In the second instance, the GP would receive no payouts until the LPs have received
their initial investment and the hurdle rate has been met at the aggregate level. Since
the fund only breaks even at the aggregate level, the GP would receive no performance
payouts.



    Exhibit 11: Whole-of-Fund (European) Waterfall Example

                                Year                      Amount ($mm)                              Profit

    Investment no.     Invested         Sold           Invested         Sold            $mm      %           GP at 20%

1                           1             4               $10            $20            $10    26.0%            —
2                           2             5               $20            $35            $15    20.5%            —
3                           2             7               $40            $80            $40    14.9%            —
4                           3             7               $20            $20             —       —              —
                                   © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
26           Learning Module 1                                  Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures



                                 Year                        Amount ($mm)                            Profit

    Investment no.     Invested          Sold             Invested         Sold         $mm         %          GP at 20%
5                          3               8                 $35            $25         ($10)      neg             —
6                          4               9                 $25            $20         ($5)       neg             —
7                          5               9                 $30            $—          ($30)      neg             —
8                          5              10                 $20            $—          ($20)      neg             —
Total                      1              10                $200           $200          —          —              —



                                    QUESTION SET


                                        1. Compensation structures for alternative investments most likely are:
                                           A. less complex than those of traditional investments.
                                           B. equally complex as those of traditional investments.
                                           C. more complex than those of traditional investments.
                                          Solution:
                                          C is correct. The illiquidity, complexity, and long-term nature of alterna-
                                          tive investments require more complex structures to bridge potential gaps
                                          between manager and investor interests. Alternative investment struc-
                                          tures may explicitly address both the roles and responsibilities of investors
                                          and managers to address these gaps. In addition, alternative investment
                                          structures tailor the distribution of returns between these two parties to
                                          minimize the divergence of incentives between manager and investor. A is
                                          incorrect because the compensation structures for alternative investments
                                          are more complex, not less complex, than those for traditional investments.
                                          B is incorrect because the compensation structures for alternative invest-
                                          ments are more complex than, not equally complex as, those for traditional
                                          investments.

                                        2. Identify the following statement as true or false: Limited partners (LPs) are
                                           involved in the management of the alternative investment fund in which
                                           they invest; they assist the general partner (GP) in the operations and deci-
                                           sions of the fund.
                                           A. True
                                           B. False
                                          Solution:
                                          False. LPs play passive roles and are not involved in the management of the
                                          fund (although co-investment rights allow LPs to make additional direct
                                          investments in the portfolio companies); the operations and decisions of the
                                          fund are controlled solely by the GP.

                                        3. Calculate the general partner’s performance fee earned based on the follow-
                                           ing terms:
                                                                                    ​




                                                Single-period fund rate of return                 20%
                                                Hard hurdle rate                                  10%
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Structures                                                     27



        GP performance fee                                    18%
        Catch-up clause                                        none
                                            ​




      A. 1.6%
      B. 1.8%
      C. 2.0%
     Solution:
     The correct answer is B, 1.8%, determined as follows:
     A GP’s rate of return when there is no catch-up clause is calculated as
      rGP=max[0, p(r – rh)],
     where
                                            ​




        Symbol                 Stands for

        rGP                    GP’s rate of return
        p                      GP’s performance fee
        r                      Single-period fund rate of return
        rh                     Hard hurdle rate
                                            ​




     Using the terms noted results in a rate of return for the GP of 1.8%:
      rGP = max[0, 18%(20% – 10%)].

      rGP = 1.8%.
     A is incorrect because it is calculated using a single-period fund rate of
     return of 18%, a hard hurdle rate of 10%, and a GP performance fee of 20%.
     C is incorrect because it is calculated using a single-period fund rate of re-
     turn of 18%, a hard hurdle rate of 8%, and a GP performance fee of 20%.

  4. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks: A ____________agrees
     to manage a fund’s operations under an agreed standard of care and to
     perform such activities as buying or selling assets, borrowing funds, es-
     tablishing reserves, or entering into contracts on behalf of the fund. A
     ____________________ establishes the terms of a limited partnership and
     governs the actions and decisions of the limited partnership.
     Solution:
     A general partner agrees to manage a fund’s operations under an agreed
     standard of care and to perform such activities as buying or selling assets,
     borrowing funds, establishing reserves, or entering into contracts on behalf
     of the fund. A limited partnership agreement (LPA) establishes the terms of
     a limited partnership and governs the actions and decisions of the limited
     partnership.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
28   Learning Module 1                                Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures


                            5. Identify the investment type in which each of the following investments best
                               fits.
                                                                        ​




                             Investment                     Traditional Investment        Alternative Investment

                             A. Alibaba shares traded
                             on the Frankfurt Stock
                             Exchange
                             B. Real estate holdings
                             C. Hedge fund shares
                             invested in common stock
                             D. An investment in an
                             infrastructure project via a
                             public–private partnership
                             E. The most junior tranche
                             in an asset-backed security
                                                                        ​




                               Solution:
                                                                        ​




                             Investment         Traditional Investment         Alternative Investment

                             A.                 Publicly traded equity
                                                shares are a traditional,
                                                not an alternative,
                                                investment.
                             B.                                                Real estate is a real, tangible physi-
                                                                               cal asset that will generate current
                                                                               and/or future cash flows.
                             C.                                                Hedge funds are private investment
                                                                               vehicles, not traditional ones, even
                                                                               though they may invest in public
                                                                               equities or fixed income, private
                                                                               capital, and/or real assets. They are
                                                                               distinguished by their investment
                                                                               approach rather than the types of
                                                                               investments they make via the fund.
                             D.                                                Infrastructure is a special type of
                                                                               real asset typically involving land,
                                                                               buildings, and other long-lived
                                                                               fixed assets that are intended for
                                                                               public use and provide essential
                                                                               services. When private investors
                                                                               get involved in such projects, they
                                                                               participate through a public–private
                                                                               partnership.
                             E.                 The most junior tranche
                                                in an asset-backed secu-
                                                rity is still a fixed-income
                                                instrument. Fixed-income
                                                instruments are tradi-
                                                tional investments.
                                                                        ​
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Practice Problems                                                                      29




   PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. Which of the following documents provides tailored terms for a specific investor?
   A. A side letter

   B. An excusal right

   C. A limited partnership agreement

2. Identify the fee approach that most directly encourages private equity fund man-
   agers to invest selectively, not just quickly. Management fees:
   A. based on committed capital

   B. combined with an incentive fee

   C. based on a fixed percentage of assets under management

3. Which performance fee modification grants limited partners the right to reclaim
   a portion of the general partner’s performance fee?
   A. Catch-up clause

   B. High-water mark

   C. Clawback provision

4. Which of the following features is most likely associated with an alternative in-
   vestment rather than a traditional one?
   A. Illiquidity

   B. Smaller capital outlays

   C. Shorter investment time horizons

5. Assets developed through a public–private partnership typically involve:
   A. long-lived fixed assets intended for public use.

   B. ownership capital used in the early life cycle of a venture.

   C. commercial real estate where private business activity is the primary cash
      flow source.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
30   Learning Module 1                                Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures


                         6.

                                          Investment 1             Investment 2             Investment 3

                                                             A


                                                                     Alternative                  C
                                                                 Investments Fund


                                                             B


                                          Investor 1                Investor 2                 Investor 3

                              Referring to the diagram above, identify the label (A, B, or C) that best corre-
                              sponds to each of the following financial measures

                                   A.                                     1. Management fee
                                   B.                                     2. Net return
                                   C.                                     3. Gross return


                         7. Which of the following options is the most likely ranking of the alternative invest-
                            ment methods—from most desirable to least—for the following pension fund?A
                            well-endowed university pension fund with significant in-house knowledge,
                            skills, and oversight capabilities is seeking alternative investments to diversify its
                            existing asset portfolio and produce higher returns than more traditional invest-
                            ments while retaining as much control as possible.
                              A. fund investment, co-investment, direct investment

                              B. direct investment, co-investment, fund investment

                              C. co-investment, direct investment, fund investment

                         8. From the following options, identify the most important reason that investors in
                            alternative funds compensate managers using a performance-based fee structure.
                            To:
                              A. penalize managers for poor or declining performance over time

                              B. better align manager and investor incentives over longer periods

                              C. protect themselves from paying managers twice for the same returns
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Solutions                                                                                  31




   SOLUTIONS
1. The correct answer is A. In addition to limited partnership agreements (LPAs),
   a supplemental document known as a side letter also may be negotiated. Side
   letters are agreements between the general partner and one or more limited part-
   ners that exist outside the LPA and whose terms override or modify the original
   limited partnership agreement terms. A side letter is negotiated to address the
   unique legal, regulatory, or reporting requirements of a specific investor. B is
   incorrect because an excusal right gives an investor the right to forgo a capital
   contribution or to not participate in a particular type of investment. An excusal
   right is granted when it has been stipulated in a side letter, not independently. C
   is incorrect because the limited partnership agreement establishes and governs
   the terms of a limited partnership; its terms apply to all limited partners, not just
   to a specific investor who requires tailored terms.

2. The correct answer is A. Private equity funds typically calculate their manage-
   ment fee based on committed capital, which is the total amount that the limited
   partners have promised to fund future investments, rather than based on assets
   under management. The committed-capital basis for management fees is an
   important distinction from hedge funds, whose management fees are typically
   based on assets under management. Having committed capital as the basis for
   management fee calculations reduces the incentive for GPs to deploy the com-
   mitted capital as quickly as possible to grow their fee base and thus allows the
   GPs to be selective about deploying capital into investment opportunities. B is
   incorrect because alternative investment funds usually combine a management
   fee with a performance fee paid when fund returns exceed a specified hurdle rate.
   Although this combined fee approach is typical for alternative investment funds,
   it is not what encourages managers to invest selectively, rather than quickly. C is
   incorrect because typically hedge funds and REITs charge a management fee on
   assets under management, while private equity funds instead levy management
   fees on committed capital.

3. C is correct. A clawback provision grants limited partners the right to reclaim a
   portion of the general partner’s performance fee. Clawback provisions are usually
   activated when a GP exits successful deals early on but incurs losses on deals later
   in the fund’s life. A is incorrect because a catch-up clause allows a general partner
   to accelerate performance fees once a fund exceeds a specified soft hurdle rate. B
   is incorrect because the high-water mark identifies the fund’s peak value as of a
   performance calculation date net of fees; it is not a performance fee modification.

4. A is correct. Investors are often attracted to alternative investments if they are
   seeking greater diversification and higher expected returns than traditional in-
   vestments can deliver; alternative investments are often longer-term, illiquid in-
   vestments in less efficient markets. B is incorrect because alternative investments
   often require larger capital outlays, not smaller ones than traditional investments.
   C is incorrect because alternative investments typically require long investment
   time horizons compared to those of traditional investments.

5. A is correct. In a public–private partnership (PPP), both governments and private
   investors are involved in funding and completing long-lived fixed assets intended
   for public use and/or to provide essential services. B is incorrect because own-
   ership capital used for non-public companies in the early life cycle of a venture
   pertains to venture capital, not to public–private partnerships. C is incorrect
   because typically a public–private partnership is used to fund and develop
   infrastructure (i.e., long-lived fixed assets intended for public use and to provide
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
32   Learning Module 1                                Alternative Investment Features, Methods, and Structures


                             essential services), not commercial real estate for private business activity.

                         6. A. 2 is correct. In alternative fund investing, the fund manager pays the net re-
                            turn (gross return less management fees) to investors.
                            B. 3 is correct. The returns generated by fund investments are gross returns.
                            From these, management deducts its fees, paying the remainder (net fees) to fund
                            investors.
                            C. 1 is correct. Management fees and performance fees are how alternative fund
                            managers are compensated for managing the fund and its investments.

                         7. B is correct. It shows the three alternative investment methods from most control
                            to least. Direct investing offers investors maximum flexibility and control when it
                            comes to investment choice, methods of financing, and timing. Co-investors gain
                            more control than fund-only investors but not as much as direct investors. Fund
                            investors have the least control; their decisions are limited to either investing in
                            the fund or not. A is incorrect because it ranks the three investment methods
                            from least control to most. C is incorrect because it puts co-investment, the alter-
                            native investment method with some control but not the most, in front of direct
                            investment, which offers maximum control and flexibility.

                         8. B is correct. Investors in alternative funds usually compensate managers using a
                            performance-based, versus flat, fee structure to better align manager and investor
                            incentives over longer periods. A is incorrect because while performance fees/fee
                            structures can penalize managers for declining performance, that is not the most
                            important reason for a performance-based fee structure. C is incorrect because
                            although calculation of a manager’s performance may include reference to a
                            fund’s peak value (high-water mark) in order to avoid paying twice for the same
                            returns, this is not the most important reason that investors in alternative funds
                            compensate using a performance-based fee structure.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.




LEARNING MODULE


2
Alternative Investment
Performance and Returns
LEARNING OUTCOMES
  Mastery    The candidate should be able to:

             describe the performance appraisal of alternative investments
             calculate and interpret alternative investment returns both before
             and after fees




INTRODUCTION
Investment performance measurement on common asset classes, such as public
                                                                                        1
equity and debt, is relatively straightforward. In alternative investments, there are
unique features that make this asset class somewhat complicated when it comes to
measurement of investment risk and return. In this learning module, we first discuss
these unique characteristics and the challenges they pose to performance appraisal.
Then we explain the various features in the complex fee arrangement in alternative
investments and the nuances when it comes to calculating investor returns.

  LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW

      ■   Alternative investments differ from traditional asset classes in
          that they involve longer time horizons, unique patterns of cash
          flows, the use of leverage, illiquid positions, more complex fee struc-
          tures, different tax and accounting treatment, and so on. In addition,
          returns are usually less normally distributed for alternative invest-
          ments than for traditional investments.
      ■   The investment life cycle is usually longer and involves three phases:
          capital commitment, capital deployment, and capital distribution.
      ■   Internal rate of return (IRR) is often the preferred measure for alter-
          native investment returns. The multiple of invested capital (MOIC)
          is often used as a shortcut measure, but it ignores the timing of cash
          flows.
      ■   Customized and complex compensation arrangements seek to align
          manager and investor incentives. Special provisions also exist for the
          lockup and redemption of capital from investors.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
34   Learning Module 2                                        Alternative Investment Performance and Returns


                                ■   In addition to a base management fee, alternative investments often
                                    charge additional performance fees based on a percentage of peri-
                                    odic fund returns. When calculating fees and investors’ net returns,
                                    different features have to be considered, such as founder share class,
                                    either/or fee structure, hurdle rate, and high-water mark and clawback
                                    clauses.
                                ■   It is difficult to generalize performance appraisal for these investments
                                    because returns may vary depending on how and when a particular
                                    investor invested in a particular vehicle.



                          LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT


                            1. In which part of the investment life cycle of a private equity invest-
                               ment should investors generally expect a positive cash flow?
                               A. Capital commitment
                               B. Capital deployment
                                C. Capital distribution
                               Solution:
                               C is correct. In the initial capital commitment phase, fees and expenses are
                               immediately incurred prior to capital deployment, and assets may generate
                               little or no income during this first phase. In the capital deployment phase,
                               cash outflows typically exceed inflows as funds are deployed. Only in the
                               capital distribution phase can excess income be generated from the invested
                               properties and substantial capital gains be realized upon the sale of assets.

                            2. Why is IRR preferred for performance measurement for alternative
                               investments?
                               A. IRR is commonly used for other asset classes.
                               B. IRR is easy and intuitive to calculate.
                                C. IRR takes into account the timing of cash flows in long-lived alterna-
                                   tive investments.
                               Solution:
                               C is correct. IRR is seldom used to measure investment performance of
                               other asset classes with publicly quoted market prices. Although IRR is
                               complicated to calculate and involves assumptions on opportunity costs and
                               reinvestment rates, it is the best metric to evaluate long-lived alternative
                               investments because it takes into account the unique timing of cash flows in
                               the investment life cycle of alternative investments.

                            3. Which of the following statements regarding hedge fund fee structure is
                               correct?
                               A. The periodic returns of all investors in the same fund must be
                                  identical.
                               B. Hedge funds usually charge a performance fee based on a percentage
                                  of periodic return above a certain threshold.
                       © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Introduction                                                                              35


      C. The management and performance fee rates are always the same for all
         investors in the same fund.
     Solution:
     B is correct. A hedge fund usually charges both a flat management fee
     and an additional performance fee based on a percentage of periodic fund
     returns. Periodic performance results may vary based on which investor has
     invested and when the investor invested into the fund. Besides, a particu-
     lar investor may face significantly lower incentive fees if she invests more
     capital in a fund at an earlier phase or is willing to accept greater restrictions
     on redemptions.

  4. A $100 million hedge fund charges all its investors a 2% management fee
     and a 20% performance fee if the periodic return, net of management fee,
     exceeds a 5% hard hurdle rate. All fees are deducted based on the end-of-
     year value. If the fund makes a gross return (before fees) of 8% for the year,
     what is the investor’s return, net of fees, closest to (ignoring any high-water
     mark provisions)?
      A. 4.67%
      B. 5.67%
      C. 5.84%
     Solution:
     B is correct. If the hedge fund makes 8% gross return for the year, its net
     asset value has grown to $108 million before any fees are deducted.
     Management fee = $108 × 2% = $2.16 million.
     Performance fee = [($108 – $2.16) – ($100 × $1.05%)] × 20% = $0.168
     million.
     Net asset value after fee deduction = $108 – $2.16 – $0.168 = $105.672
     million.
     Net investor return = ($105.672 – $100)/$100 ​≈ ​5.67%.

  5. A €100 million private equity fund has a preferred return of 5% per annum,
     20% carried interest with full catch-up, and standard clawback clauses. The
     fund realizes a gross gain of 50% in two years before it distributes all its capi-
     tal back to its LPs. Ignoring management fees, the total carried interest to
     the GP for the two years is closest to:
      A. €8 million.
      B. €10 million.
      C. €16 million.
     Solution:
     B is correct. After two years, the net asset value of the fund has grown to
     €100 million × 150% = €150 million shortly before distribution. The pre-
     ferred return to the LPs for the two years totaled €100 million × 5% × 2 =
     €10 million. (Note that annual preferred return is typically not compound-
     ed.) Next, the GP is allowed full catch-up until the GP’s carried interest has
     caught up to the 20% of the total profit accounted for so far, or €2.5 million
     (€10 million/0.8 × 0.2). The remaining profit of 50 – 10 – 2.5 = €37.5 million
     is then split 80/20 between the LPs and GP; that is, the GP will get another
     €7.5 million (€37.5 million × 20%). Therefore, the total carried interest to the
     GP is 2.5 + 7.5 = €10 million, which is exactly 20% of the €50 million gain.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
36   Learning Module 2                                        Alternative Investment Performance and Returns




             2           ALTERNATIVE INVESTMENT PERFORMANCE

                                       describe the performance appraisal of alternative investments

                         The unique features, form, and structure of alternative investments must be considered
                         when evaluating the relative performance between alternative investments and when
                         comparing their performance to that of more common asset classes over time. In
                         particular, such features as staggered capital commitments over time, longer required
                         investment horizons, reduced liquidity, and less efficient markets highlighted in prior
                         lessons must be factored into the performance appraisal for alternative investments.
                         Alternative investment returns are usually less normally distributed and therefore
                         require different measures of risk and return than those used for more traditional
                         asset classes.


                         Alternative Investment Performance Appraisal
                         Appraising the performance of alternative investments requires more scrutiny in
                         certain areas than traditional asset classes do.


                         Comparability with Traditional Asset Classes
                         Public equity and debt securities share several characteristics that facilitate the compar-
                         ison of their performance over a particular period. These standardized claims involve
                         no further required capital commitments and provide identical claims to periodic cash
                         flows, such as dividends in the case of shareholders or contractual bond coupons and
                         principal for debtholders. Prices of publicly traded securities are often continuously
                         quoted, with large peer groups of similar investments available and common indexes
                         used to benchmark returns. Performance appraisal of publicly traded securities is thus
                         straightforward to implement and evaluate.
                             In contrast, alternative investments are customized investments whose distinctive
                         features complicate performance appraisal between investments and across asset
                         classes. These features include
                             ■   the timing of cash inflows and outflows for specific investments,
                             ■   the use of borrowed funds,
                             ■   the valuation of individual portfolio positions over specific phases of the
                                 investment life cycle, and
                             ■   more complex fee structures and tax and accounting treatment.



                         Performance Appraisal and Alternative Investment Features
                         When appraising alternative investments, four areas to focus on include the life cycle
                         phase of the investment, the amount of borrowed funds used to maintain the market
                         position, the valuation of the assets, and the fee structure of the fund.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Performance                                                         37


Investment Life Cycle
Unlike public debt or equity securities purchased in the primary or secondary market,
alternative investments usually involve a longer investment life cycle with distinct
phases characterized by net cash outflows and inflows that complicate periodic return
comparisons. Life cycle phases and timing vary across alternative investment types
but generally fall into three distinct periods, as shown in Exhibit 1.



  Exhibit 1: Investment Life Cycle



                                      Capital                           Return
                      Capital      Distribution
                    Deployment
         Capital
       Commitment                                 Cash Inflows



                                                                                 Years



                                       Cash
                                     Outflows




   ■   Capital commitment: Alternative managers identify and select appropriate
       investments with either an immediate or a delayed commitment of capital
       (known as a capital call) that may be in an early-stage company in the case
       of venture capital, a more mature firm for private equity, or one or more
       properties in the case of real estate. Returns are usually negative over this
       phase because fees and expenses are immediately incurred prior to capital
       deployment and assets may generate little or no income during this first
       phase.
   ■   Capital deployment: Over this second phase, alternative managers deploy
       funds to engage in construction or make property improvements in the case
       of real estate or infrastructure, incur expenses in the turnaround phase of
       a mature company in the case of private equity, or initiate operations for a
       startup using venture capital. Cash outflows typically exceed inflows, with
       management fees further reducing returns.
   ■   Capital distribution: When the turnaround strategy, startup phase, or
       property improvements are completed and if the investment is successful,
       the underlying assets appreciate in price and/or generate income in excess
       of costs, causing fund returns to accelerate. The fund may realize substantial
       capital gains from liquidating or exiting its investments, which may involve
       an initial public offering (IPO) for venture capital or the sale of properties in
       the case of real estate.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
38   Learning Module 2                                        Alternative Investment Performance and Returns


                             The so-called J-curve effect (because it resembles the letter J) shown in Exhibit
                         1 represents the initial negative return in the capital commitment phase followed by
                         an acceleration of returns through the capital deployment phase. Returns often level
                         off as capital is distributed to investors, investments are sold, and the fund is closed.
                             As a result of the cash inflows and outflows that occur over the investment life cycle,
                         an internal rate of return is often used as an initial approach to calculate investment
                         returns for these investments, which include private equity and real estate investments.
                             The performance assessment in both private equity and real estate investments
                         depends far more on the timing and magnitude of cash flows in and out of the invest-
                         ments, and these are often hard to standardize and anticipate. Given the long time
                         horizon, the application of different tax treatments can have a non-trivial impact on
                         after-tax investment returns.
                             As a general rule, the best way to start evaluating such investments is with the
                         IRR, taking into account the respective cash flows into an investment and the tim-
                         ing thereof, versus the magnitude and the timing of the cash flows returned by the
                         investment (inclusive of tax benefits).
                             In an independent, fixed-life private equity fund, the decisions to raise money,
                         take money in the form of capital calls, and distribute proceeds are all at the discre-
                         tion of the private equity manager. Timing of cash flows is an important part of the
                         investment decision process. The private equity manager should thus be rewarded
                         or penalized for the results of those timing decisions, and the calculation of an IRR
                         is key for doing so.
                             Although the determination of an IRR involves certain assumptions about a financ-
                         ing rate to use for outgoing cash flows (typically a weighted average cost of capital) and
                         a reinvestment rate to use for incoming cash flows (which must be assumed and may
                         or may not actually be earned), the IRR is the key metric used to assess longer-term
                         alternative investments in the private equity and real estate worlds. IRR calculations
                         will be covered in more depth in the Corporate Issuers topic area.

                          EXAMPLE 1

                            Peterburgh Capital, LLC
                            Peterburgh Capital, LLC, a private equity vehicle, is considering investment in
                            various companies and is expecting the following cash flow pattern from these
                            investments:
                                                                       ​




                                                             Cash Inflow                 Cash Outflow
                                  Year                         (USD)                        (USD)

                                  0                                —                      2,500,000
                                  1                                —                      4,000,000
                                  2                                —                      1,700,000
                                  3                              500,000                  1,000,000
                                  4                           1,000,000                        —
                                  5                           3,000,000                        —
                                  6                           12,500,000                       —

                                                                                     n      C ​F​​
                                                                       ​




                               IRR can be calculated by the standard formula ∑
                                                                             ​ t=0​_
                                                                                   ​ i
                                                                                       i
                                                                                         ​ = 0​, or using a
                                                                                          ​(1 + r)​ ​
                            financial calculator, r ≈ 14.596%.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Performance                                                           39


    As is true for any IRR calculation, assumptions regarding the opportunity cost
of outgoing cash flows and the reinvestment rate for incoming cash flows will affect
the results.
    Because of this complexity, a shortcut methodology often used by both private
equity and real estate managers involves simply citing a multiple of invested capital
(MOIC), or money multiple, on total invested capital (which is paid-in capital less
management fees and fund expenses). Here, one simply measures the total value of all
realized investments and residual asset values (assets that may still be awaiting their
ultimate sale) relative to an initial total investment. MOIC is calculated as follows:
   MOIC = (Realized value of investment + Unrealized value of investment)/Total
   amount of invested capital.
                                                                               (1)
Although the MOIC ignores the timing of cash flows, it is easier to calculate, and it
is intuitively easier to understand when someone says he received two or three times
his initial investment. But how long it takes to realize this value does matter. A 2×
return on one’s initial investment would be great if the return were collected over two
years but far less compelling if it took 15 years to realize.
     In general, because private equity and real estate investments involve longer holding
periods, there is less emphasis on evaluating them in terms of shorter-term portfo-
lio correlation benefits. After a private equity fund has fully drawn in its monetary
commitments, interim accounting values for a private equity partnership become less
critical for a period of time because no incoming or outgoing cash flows may imme-
diately hinge on such valuations. During this “middle period” in the life of a private
equity fund, accounting values may not always be particularly reflective of the future
potential realizations (and hence the expected returns) of the fund. It is not that the
value of the investments is not actually rising and falling in the face of economic influ-
ences; rather, accounting conventions simply leave longer-lived investments marked
at their initial cost for some time or make only modest adjustments to carrying value
until clearer impairments or realization events take place.

KNOWLEDGE CHECK: MOIC CALCULATION

   Himitsu, a private equity firm, makes an initial investment of JPY3.8
   billion into ZZZ company in Year 0. Eight years later, it sells its stake
   in ZZZ for JPY8.5 billion. Additional capital investments were made in Year 2
   and in Year 3 for JPY1.2 billion and JPY200 million, respectively.

   1. Calculate the MOIC.
      Solution:
      MOIC = 8.5/(3.8 + 1.2 + 0.2) = 1.63×.
                                            ​




                                                  Amount               Year

         Invested Capital                        (3,800,000)             0
                                                     —                   1
         Additional Capital                      (1,200,000)             2
         Additional Capital                       (200,000)              3
         Liquidity Event                          8,500,000              8
         MOIC                                      1.63×
         IRR                                        20%
                                            ​
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
40   Learning Module 2                                        Alternative Investment Performance and Returns


                         Use of Borrowed Funds
                         Alternative investments may use borrowed funds to increase investment returns.
                         This form of financial leverage has the effect of magnifying both gains and losses by
                         allowing investors to take a market position that is larger than the capital commit-
                         ted. Consider a cash investment Vc with a periodic rate of return r. If we assume an
                         investor is able to borrow at a periodic rate of rb to increase the size of its investment
                         by borrowed funds of Vb, we can calculate a simple leveraged rate of return rL for the
                         period as follows:
                             rL = Leveraged portfolio return/Cash position = [r × (Vc+Vb) – (Vb × rb)]/Vc. (2)
                         We can rearrange Equation 2 to show the relationship between the cash portfolio
                         return, r, and the leveraged rate of return, rL, as follows:
                             rL = r + Vb/Vc(r – rb).                                                         (3)
                         Hedge funds leverage their portfolios by using derivatives or borrowing capital from
                         prime brokers, negotiating with them to establish margin requirements, interest, and
                         fees in advance of trading. In a typical margin financing arrangement, the prime broker
                         essentially lends the hedge fund the shares, bonds, or derivatives, and the hedge fund
                         deposits cash or other collateral into a margin account with the prime broker based
                         on certain fractions of the investment positions. The margin account represents the
                         hedge fund’s net equity in its positions. The minimum margin required depends on
                         the riskiness of the investment portfolio and the creditworthiness of the hedge fund.
                             Leverage is a large part of the reason that some hedge funds either earn
                         larger-than-normal returns or suffer significant losses. If the margin account or the
                         hedge fund’s equity in a position declines below a certain level, the lender initiates
                         a margin call and requests that the hedge fund put up more collateral. An inability
                         to meet margin calls can have the effect of magnifying or locking in losses because
                         the hedge fund may have to liquidate (close out) the losing position. This liquidation
                         can lead to further losses if the order size is sufficiently large to move the security’s
                         market price before the fund can sufficiently eliminate the position. Under normal
                         conditions, the application of leverage may be necessary for yielding meaningful
                         returns from given quantitative, arbitrage, or relative value strategies. But with added
                         leverage comes increased risk.

                          EXAMPLE 2

                            Leverage by Lupulus Opportunity Fund LLC
                            Lupulus Opportunity Fund LLC, a hedge fund that has USD100 million of capital,
                            ordinarily uses leverage to invest in a variety of equity-linked notes.
                                Scenario 1: Suppose Lupulus’s underlying positions return 8%. If it could add
                            leverage of USD50 million to the portfolio at a funding cost of 4%, what would
                            have been the leveraged return?
                                Using Equation 3, the leveraged return can be calculated as follows:
                                Vc = 100; Vb = 50.

                                rL = 0.08 + (50/100)(0.08 – 0.04) = 10%.
                                Scenario 2: Suppose Lupulus’s underlying positions incur a loss of 2% instead
                            of earning a gain. What would have been the leveraged return if Lupulus had
                            borrowed USD50 million at 4%?
                                Again, using Equation 3, Vc = 100 and Vb = 50
                                rL = –0.02 + (50/100)(–0.02 – 0.04) = –5%.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Performance                                                               41


       In other words, Lupulus would have magnified its portfolio loss from –2%
   to –5% by adding leverage of USD50 million.
       Scenario 3: If Lupulus’s underlying positions make a gain of 6%, what is the
   breakeven borrowing rate at which Lupulus is indifferent to adding leverage to
   the portfolio?
       From Equation 3, Lupulus would be indifferent about adding leverage when
   the magnification effect of leverage equals 0; that is,
       when rL = r, or (Vb/Vc)(r – rb) = 0,
        rb = r = 6%.

    As the previous example shows, the leveraged rate of return will exceed that of
an equivalent cash portfolio if the market return on assets exceeds the borrowing
rate. This example assumes the investor has unlimited access to borrow freely on an
unsecured basis. The access to borrowed funds or lack thereof is an important factor
in evaluating the risk of leveraged investments.

Valuation
Alternative assets are often characterized by illiquidity, which makes performance
appraisal over time challenging and periodic comparison with common asset classes
difficult. Accounting rules dictate that investments must be recorded at their fair value
for financial reporting purposes. The fair value of an investment is a market-based
measure based on observable or derived assumptions to determine a price that market
participants would use to exchange an asset or liability (often referred to as the exit
price for a seller) in an orderly transaction at a specific time. Assumptions used to
measure fair value follow a three-level hierarchy, as shown in Exhibit 2:



  Exhibit 2: Fair Value Hierarchy

Level       Description                             Sample Application and Method

Level 1     Quoted prices in active markets         Exchange-traded public equity securities
            for identical asset/liability that      (observed closing market price)
            may be accessed as of measure-
            ment date
Level 2     Inputs other than quoted market         Over-the-counter interest rate derivatives
            prices in Level 1 that are directly     (pricing model using quoted market prices)
            or indirectly observable for an
            asset/liability
Level 3     Unobservable inputs are used to         Private equity or real estate investments
            measure fair value for asset/liabil-    (cash flow projection models with rea-
            ity in which there is little, if any,   sonably available market participant
            market activity as of the measure-      assumptions)
            ment date

While common asset classes often rely on Level 1 inputs, the interim valuation of
private equity, real estate, and other less frequently traded assets based on Level 3
inputs is more challenging. Interim accounting values may be less critical for the part-
nership itself over a period where no incoming or outgoing cash flows are expected.
The lack of new market information over time may thus anchor the value of these
long-lived investments at or near initial cost, with adjustments to carrying value when
impairments or realization events occur. The relatively stable accounting valuations of
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
42   Learning Module 2                                        Alternative Investment Performance and Returns


                         these strategies may give investors a false sense that they are less correlated with and
                         less volatile than other investments, although a more realistic picture may emerge if
                         managers are forced to liquidate a portfolio prematurely.
                             For Level 3 asset pricing, regardless of the model used by a manager in such cir-
                         cumstances, that model should be independently tested, benchmarked, and calibrated
                         to industry-accepted standards to ensure a consistency of approach. Because of the
                         potential for conflicts of interest when applying estimates of value, hedge funds must
                         develop procedures for in-house valuation, communicate these procedures to clients,
                         and adhere to them consistently.
                             Notwithstanding best practice, the very nature of assets that can be valued only on
                         a “mark-to-model” basis can and should be a focus for the alternative asset investor.
                         A model may reflect an imperfect theoretical valuation and not a true liquidation
                         value. The illiquid nature of these assets means that estimates, rather than observable
                         transaction prices, may well have factored into any valuation. As a result, returns may
                         be smoothed or overstated and the volatility of returns, understated. As a generalized
                         statement, any investment vehicle that is heavily involved with Level 3 priced assets
                         deserves increased scrutiny and due diligence.

                         Fees
                         Alternative investment fees also vary from those for common asset classes, which
                         typically involve a flat management fee. Alternative investments often levy additional
                         performance fees based on a percentage of periodic fund returns. Performance
                         appraisal for these investments can be difficult to generalize, because results may
                         vary significantly based on which investor has invested when in a particular vehicle.
                             For example, an investor may face significantly lower incentive fees if she invests
                         more capital in a fund at an earlier phase or is willing to accept greater restrictions
                         on redemptions. Also, an investor entering an alternative fund following a sharp drop
                         in value may incur performance fees if the fund rises, while an earlier investor who
                         experienced the sharp decline in value from its peak may be exempt from such fees
                         for the same period. These and other details of these complex alternative investment
                         fee arrangements and their effect on investment return are the subject of the follow-
                         ing lesson.

                          QUESTION SET


                            1. Which of the following is not a factor that makes comparison of
                               performance between alternative investments and public securities difficult?
                                A. Alternative investments charge higher fees.
                                B. The use of leverage in alternative investments magnifies their risk and
                                   return measures.
                                 C. The fair value of portfolio positions in alternative investments may not
                                    be readily available.
                                Solution:
                                A is correct. Although an alternative investment may charge a higher fee, it
                                is not the absolute fee level but the complexity of the fee arrangement that
                                makes alternative investment appraisal unique compared to other common
                                asset classes.
                                Alternative investments often involve the use the of explicit leverage, which
                                has the effect of magnified gains and losses. Alternative assets are often
                                characterized by illiquidity with unobservable market prices, making per-
                                formance appraisal over time and periodic comparison with common asset
                                classes challenging.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Performance                                                           43


  2. Describe the J-curve effect in alternative investments.
     Solution:
     The J-curve effect in alternative investments describes the initial negative re-
     turn in the capital commitment phase followed by an acceleration of returns
     through the capital deployment phase. Returns often level off as capital is
     distributed to investors, investments are sold, and the fund is closed.

  3. A private equity closes a fund with a capital commitment of €750 million. It
     has a capital call of €500 million initially and another €250 million at the end
     of Year 1. The management fee is 2% per annum. At the end of Year 5, a total
     of €1.0 billion is distributed to its investors, and the fund is left with €500
     million in asset value. The multiple of invested capital (MOIC) after five
     years is closest to:
      A. 1.3×.
      B. 2.0×.
      C. 2.2×.
     Solution:
     C is correct. Using Equation 1, MOIC = (Realized value of investment +
     Unrealized value of investment)/Total amount of invested capital, where
     invested capital equals total paid-in capital less management fees and fund
     expenses. MOIC is different from the IRR measure because it ignores the
     timing of cash flows.
     Total paid-in capital = 500 + 250 = 750.
     Total management fee for 5 years = 750 × 0.02 × 5 = 75.
     Total invested capital = 750 – 75 = 675.
     MOIC = (1,000 + 500)/675 ≈ 2.2×.

  4. If the market return of underlying portfolio positions is expected to be 10%
     and the fund manager adds 100% explicit leverage to its capital at a borrow-
     ing rate of 3%, what is the expected leveraged return?
     Solution:
     Using Equation 3,
      rL = r + (Vb/Vc)(r – rb) = 0.10 + (100/100)(0.10 – 0.03) = 17%.


  5. Match the fair value classification of assets to their description for financial
     reporting purpose:

     Fair Value Classification Description
                                              ​




    1. Level 1 assets    (a) Inputs other than quoted market prices are directly or
                         indirectly observable for valuation on measurement date
    2. Level 2 assets    (b) Unobservable inputs are used to evaluate fair value for the
                         assets
    3. Level 3 assets    (c) Quoted prices in active markets for identical asset available
                         on measurement date
                                              ​




     Solution:
     1. Level 1 assets: (c) Quoted prices in active markets for identical asset avail-
     able on measurement date
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
44   Learning Module 2                                        Alternative Investment Performance and Returns


                               2. Level 2 assets: (a) Inputs other than quoted market prices are directly or
                               indirectly observable for valuation on measurement date
                               3. Level 3 assets: (b) Unobservable inputs are used to evaluate fair value for
                               the assets




             3           ALTERNATIVE INVESTMENT RETURNS

                                       calculate and interpret alternative investment returns both before
                                       and after fees

                         Hedge funds often use complex strategies to achieve outsized returns with low
                         correlation with the broader market. These more complex strategies require more
                         sophisticated portfolio management tools and a larger range of skills, making them
                         more expensive to run. Rather than paying a very high flat management fee, investors
                         demand that some of the compensation is aligned to the performance delivered by
                         the strategy in the form of a performance fee.
                             Apart from the performance fee, there are also other customized, complex com-
                         pensation arrangements that seek to align manager and investor incentives. These
                         structures are designed to reward investors for early involvement, larger investments,
                         and/or longer lockup periods. Managers benefit from applying specialized knowledge
                         and skills to achieve steadily rising returns in excess of a designated hurdle rate. These
                         complex fee structures impact returns for different investors in the same fund, as well
                         as returns before and after fees across various alternative investments.
                             Another factor that can lock in or magnify losses for hedge funds is investor
                         redemptions. Redemptions frequently occur when a hedge fund is performing poorly.
                         Redemptions may require the hedge fund manager to liquidate some positions and
                         potentially receive particularly disadvantageous prices when forced to do so by
                         redemption pressures, while also incurring transaction costs.




                            Funds sometimes charge a redemption fee to discourage redemption and to
                            offset the transaction costs for remaining investors in the fund. A notice period
                            is a period (typically 30–90 days) in advance that investors may be required to
                            notify a fund of their intent to redeem some or all their investment. This notice
                            period allows the fund manager an opportunity to liquidate a position in an
                            orderly fashion without magnifying the losses. A lockup period is the minimum
                            holding period before investors are allowed to make withdrawals or redeem shares
                            from a fund. This provision is intended to allow the hedge fund manager the
                            required time to implement and potentially realize a strategy’s expected results.
                            If the fund receives a drawdown request shortly after a new investment, the
                            lockup period forces the investors who made the request to stay in the fund for
                            a period of time rather than be allowed to immediately withdraw. In addition,
                            funds sometimes impose a gate, a provision that when implemented limits or
                            restricts redemptions for a period of time, usually at the discretion of the fund
                            manager. Investors should be aware of their liquidity needs before investing in
                            a fund with restrictive provisions.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Returns                                                           45


     A hedge fund’s ability to demand a long lockup period while raising a significant
amount of investment capital depends a great deal on the reputation of either the firm
or the hedge fund manager. Funds of hedge funds may offer more redemption flexibil-
ity than is afforded to direct investors in hedge funds because of special redemption
arrangements with the underlying hedge fund managers, the maintenance of added
cash reserves, access to temporary bridge-loan financing, or the simple avoidance of
less liquid hedge fund strategies.
     Ideally, redemption terms should be designed to match the expected liquidity of
the assets being invested in, but even with careful planning, an initial drawdown can
turn into something far more serious when it involves illiquid and obscure assets.
These left-tailed loss events are not easily modeled for hedge funds.


Alternative Investment Returns

Custom Fee Arrangements
Alternative investments often involve customized fee arrangements combining man-
agement and performance-based fees that vary based on the size, timing, and/or terms
of investor participation in the investment over time. Examples include the following:
   ■   Fees based on liquidity terms and asset size: Limited partnerships may
       charge different rates depending on the liquidity terms that an investor is
       willing to accept (longer lockups resulting in lower fees), and managers may
       discount their fees for larger investors or for placement agents who intro-
       duced these investors. Different investors in the same fund may face differ-
       ent fee structures. For example, management fees for large LPs might range
       from 0.5% to 1.5%, with incentive fees reduced to 10%–15%, depending on
       the mandate. Such reductions can be meaningful in terms of net realized
       returns. However, smaller funds with strong performance (and capacity
       constraints) are able to maintain higher fees and may even decline business
       from larger investors rather than agree to a lower fee.
   ■   Founders shares: As a way to entice early participation in startup funds,
       managers sometimes offer incentives known as founders class shares.
       Founders shares entitle investors to a lower fee structure, such as a 1.5%
       management fee and a 10% performance fee rather than a more standard 2%
       management fee and a 20% performance fee, and may apply only to the first
       $100 million in assets invested, although cutoff thresholds vary. Another
       alternative is to reduce the fees for early founders share investors once the
       fund achieves a critical mass or performance targets.
   ■   “Either/or” fees: Major institutional investors, such as the Teacher
       Retirement System of Texas, have demanded that alternative investment
       funds accept an either/or fee agreement by choosing between fixed man-
       agement and variable performance fees. Managers agree either to charge
       a lower, 1% management fee (to cover expenses during down years) or to
       accept a higher, 30% incentive fee above a mutually agreed-upon annual
       hurdle (to incentivize and reward managers during up years), whichever is
       greater. Major investors offering larger commitments may negotiate such
       novel fee structures designed to reward returns in excess of a benchmark,
       while smaller investors, such as high-net-worth individuals with smaller
       commitments, usually face more traditional fees.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
46   Learning Module 2                                        Alternative Investment Performance and Returns



                         Alternative Investment Return Calculations
                         Return calculations vary among alternative investments based on the form of the
                         investments, as described in an earlier lesson. While more liquid alternative invest-
                         ments, such as REITs, commodity index exchange-traded funds, or other frequently
                         traded investments, have a simple management fee structure similar to common assets,
                         those with longer life cycles, illiquidity, and less transparency, such as private equity,
                         hedge funds, and real estate, often use performance fees with modifications to create
                         incentives for managers to act in the best interest of investors.
                             The impact of different fee arrangements and their effect on the resulting
                         returns to investors is best illustrated using a series of examples. If we assume fixed
                         GP management fees as a percentage of assets under management (AUM) of rm,
                         beginning-of-period assets of P0, end-of-period assets of P1, and a GP performance
                         fee (p) that is a percentage of total return, the GP’s return in currency terms (RGP)
                         is as follows:
                             RGP = (P1 × rm) + max[0, (P1 – P0) × p].                                        (4)
                         And we may solve for an investor’s periodic rate of return, ri, as follows:
                             ri = (P1 – P0 – RGP)/P0.                                                        (5)


                          EXAMPLE 3

                            Kettleside Timberland LP
                            Kettleside is a timberland investment management organization with $100
                            million of initial investment capital. It charges a 1% management fee based on
                            year-end AUM (rm) and a 20% performance fee (p). In its first year, Kettleside
                            generates a 30% return. Assume management fees are calculated using an end-
                            of-period valuation.

                            1. What are Kettleside’s fees if the performance and management fees are cal-
                               culated independently? What is an investor’s effective return given this fee
                               structure?
                               Solution:
                               Using Equation 4 with P0 equal to $100 million, P1 of $130 million, rm = 1%,
                               and p = 20%,
                               RGP = $130 million × 1% + max[0, ($130 million – $100 million) × 20%]

                               = $7.3 million.

                               ri = ($130 million – $100 million – $7.3 million)/$100 million

                               = 22.7%.


                            2. What are Kettleside’s fees if the performance fee is calculated from the re-
                               turn net of the management fee? What is an investor’s net return given this
                               fee structure?
                               Solution:
                               In order to solve for GP return where performance fee is calculated net of
                               management fees, we must modify Equation 4 as follows:
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Returns                                                              47


      RGP(Net) = (P1 × rm) + max{0, [P1(1 – rm) – P0] × p}.                           (6)
     Using Equation 6 with P0 of $100 million, P1 of $130 million, rm = 1%, and p
     = 20%,
      RGP(Net) = $130 million × 1% + max{0, [$130 million(0.99) – $100 million] ×
      20%}

      = $7.04 million.

      ri = ($130 million – $100 million – $7.04 million)/$100 million

      = 22.96%.

    The previous example demonstrates how fee calculations affect investor returns,
with a higher return when fees are calculated on a net basis. Alternative investment
databases and indexes usually report fund performance net of aggregated fees. If fee
structures vary, the actual net-of-fee returns earned by various investors may vary
from the quoted return.
    One fee structure variation involves the modification of performance fees using
hurdle rates and high-water marks. In the next example, we consider the effect of both
on investor returns using the same details from the prior example.

EXAMPLE 4

  Kettleside Timberland LP Performance Fee Modifications
  As in the prior case, Kettleside Timberland LP has initial capital of $100 mil-
  lion, charging a 1% management fee based on year-end AUM (rm) and a 20%
  performance fee (p).

  1. If Kettleside’s fee agreement specifies a 6% hurdle rate with performance
     fees based on returns in excess of the hurdle rate, what are Kettleside’s fees
     assuming the performance fee is calculated net of the management fee?
     What is an investor’s net return given this fee structure?
     Solution:
     To solve for Kettleside’s fees with a hard hurdle rate calculated net of man-
     agement fees, we make a further adjustment to Equation 4 by incorporating
     the hurdle rate, rh, as follows:
      RGP(Net with Hurdle) = (P1 × rm) + max{0, [P1(1 – rm) – P0×(1.06)] × p}         (7)

      RGP(Net with Hurdle)
      = $130 million × 1% + max{0, [$130 million(0.99) – $100 million(1.06)] ×
      20%}

      = $5.84 million.

      ri = ($130 million – $100 million – $5.84 million)/$100 million

      = 24.16%.


  2. In the second year, Kettleside fund value declines to $110 million. The fee
     structure is as specified in Question 1 but also includes the use of a high-wa-
     ter mark (PHWM) computed net of fees. What are Kettleside’s fees in the
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
48   Learning Module 2                                        Alternative Investment Performance and Returns


                               second year? What is an investor’s net return for the second year given this
                               fee structure?
                               Solution:
                               We must again alter Equation 4 to include the high-water mark (PHWM) pro-
                               vision, as follows:
                               RGP(High-Water Mark) = (P2 × rm) + max[0, (P2 – PHWM) × p],                        (8)
                               where PHWM is defined as the maximum fund value at the end of any pre-
                               vious period net of fees. We may solve for investor return ri in Period 2 as
                               follows:
                               ri = (P2 – P1 – RGP)/P1.                                                           (9)

                               RGP(High-Water Mark)
                               = $110 million × 1% + max[0, ($110 million – $122.7 million) × 20%]

                               = $1.1 million.

                               ri = ($110 million – $122.7 million – $1.1 million)/$122.7 million

                               = –11.247%.
                               The beginning capital position in the second year for the investors is $130
                               million − $7.3 million = $122.7 million. The ending capital position at the
                               end of the second year is $110 million − $1.1 million = $108.9 million.

                            3. In the third year, Kettleside’s fund value increases to $128 million. The fee
                               structure is as specified in Questions 1 and 2 of Example 4. What are Ket-
                               tleside’s fees in the third year? What is an investor’s net return for the third
                               year given this fee structure?
                               Solution:
                               We amend Equations 8 and 9 to reflect returns for the third period and
                               calculate as follows:
                               RGP(High-Water Mark) = (P3 × rm) + max[0, (P3 – PHWM) × p].

                               ri = (P3 – P2 – RGP)/P2.
                               Note that the high-water mark, PHWM, is the highest value of the fund after
                               fees in all previous years. In Kettleside’s case, it was $122.7 million, the end-
                               ing value in the first year, P1.
                                                                          ​




                                Kettleside Timberland LP Performance Fee Modifications
                                                                          ​




                                    Year          Fund Value ($m), after Fees
                                      0                        100.00
                                      1                        122.70                        High-Water Mark
                                      2                        108.90

                               RGP(High-Water Mark)
                               = $128 million × 1% + max[0, ($128 million – $122.7 million) × 20%]

                               = $2.34 million.

                               ri = ($128 million – $108.9 million – $2.34 million)/$108.9 million
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Returns                                                               49


      = 15.39%.
      The beginning capital position in the third year for the investors is $110 mil-
      lion − $1.1 million = $108.9 million. The ending capital position for the third
      year is $128 million – $2.34 million = $125.66 million, which represents a
      new high-water mark to be applied the following year for this investor.

    Performance fee modifications may have similar or different effects on the peri-
odic investor returns depending on the timing of an investment. For example, if two
Kettleside investors were to purchase the fund at different times and had otherwise
similar fee structures, they would both realize a fee reduction in the case of a hard
hurdle equal to Pt × rh × p, or the product of the end-of-period fund value for year t,
the hurdle rate, and the performance fee. However, in the case of a high-water mark,
the time-dependent nature of this fee modification gives different results for an investor
who enters the fund at a later date, as in the following example.

EXAMPLE 5

   Kettleside Timberland LP High-Water Mark for New
   Investor
   At the end of Year 2, Kettleside Timberland LP has capital of $108.9 million.
   Consider the Year 3 returns of a new investor assuming the same fund perfor-
   mance and fee structure—namely, a 1% management fee based on year-end AUM
   (rm), a 20% performance fee (p), and a high-water mark provision.
      RGP(High-Water Mark) = (P3 × rm) + max[0, (P3 – PHWM) × p].

      ri = (P3 – P2 – RGP)/P2.

      RGP(High-Water Mark)
      = $128 million × 1% + max[0, ($128 million – $108.9 million) × 20%]

      = $5.1 million.

      ri = ($128 million – $108.9 million – $5.1 million)/$108.9 million

      = 12.856%.

    Note that the new investor in Example 5 realizes no high-water mark reduction in
fees as in the prior case and therefore faces a lower periodic return than the investor
participating since the fund’s inception.
    In other instances, the timing of returns can have a meaningful impact on manager
fees and investor returns, as shown in the following example of a clawback provision.

EXAMPLE 6

   Tenderledge Opportunity Fund LP—Clawback Provision
   Tenderledge Opportunity Fund makes $20 million in new investments, evenly
   divided with $10 million into Arguston Inc. (a leveraged buyout) and $10 million
   to Heartfield Digital (an early-stage venture) One year later, Arguston is sold to
   a strategic buyer for $22 million after costs. Two years later, Heartfield Digital
   fails and Tenderledge is unable to recoup any of its original investment.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
50   Learning Module 2                                        Alternative Investment Performance and Returns


                            1. If Tenderledge’s fee agreement as general partner (GP) specifies a 20% per-
                               formance fee of aggregate profits (p) with a clawback provision, which per-
                               formance fees will Tenderledge accrue and what will it ultimately receive?
                               Solution:
                               Gain in the Arguston investment: $22 million – $10 million = $12 million.

                               Loss in the Heartfield Digital investment: $0 – $10 million = –$10 million.

                               Aggregate gain of Tenderledge after two years = $12 million – $10 million
                               = $2 million.
                               Tenderledge would initially accrue 20% of the $12 million aggregate profit
                               from the sale of Arguston at the end of the first year, or $12 million × 20%
                               = $2.4 million. This amount is typically held in escrow for the benefit of the
                               GP but not paid.
                               The failure of Heartfield Digital in Year 2 reduces the original $12 million
                               gain by $10 million, so the aggregate fund gain at the end of Year 2 is only $2
                               million. This net profit results in a performance fee of $400,000 (= $2 million
                               × 20%). Tenderledge would then have to return $2 million of the previously
                               accrued performance fees to LP investor capital accounts due to the claw-
                               back provision.



                          KNOWLEDGE CHECK FEE AND RETURN CALCULATIONS

                            AWJ Capital is a hedge fund with $100 million of initial investment
                            capital. It charges a 2% management fee based on year-end AUM and
                            a 20% incentive fee. In its first year, AWJ Capital has a 30% return. Assume
                            management fees are calculated using end-of-period valuation.

                            1. What are the fees earned by AWJ if the incentive and management fees are
                               calculated independently? What is an investor’s effective return given this
                               fee structure?
                               Solution:
                               AWJ fees:
                               $130 million × 2% = $2.6 million management fee.

                               ($130 million − $100 million) × 20% = $6 million incentive fee.

                               Total fees to AWJ Capital = $8.6 million.


                            2. What are the fees earned by AWJ assuming that the incentive fee is calcu-
                               lated from the return net of the management fee? What is an investor’s net
                               return given this fee structure?
                               Solution:
                               $130 million × 2% = $2.6 million management fee.

                               ($130 million − $100 million − $2.6 million) × 20%
                               = $5.48 million incentive fee.

                               Total fees to AWJ Capital = $8.08 million.

                               Investor return = ($130 million − $100 million − $8.08 million)/$100 million
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Returns                                                           51


      = 21.92%.


  3. If the fee structure specifies a hurdle rate of 5% and the incentive fee is based
     on returns in excess of the hurdle rate, what are the fees earned by AWJ as-
     suming the performance fee is calculated net of the management fee? What
     is an investor’s net return given this fee structure?
     Solution:
      $130 million × 2% = $2.6 million management fee.

      ($130 million − $100 million − $5 million − $2.6 million) × 20%
      = $4.48 million incentive fee.

      Total fees to AWJ Capital = $7.08 million.

      Investor return = ($130 million − $100 million − $7.08 million)/$100 million
      = 22.92%.


  4. In the second year, the fund value declines to $110 million. The fee structure
     is as specified for Question 1 but also includes the use of a high-water mark
     (computed net of fees). What are the fees earned by AWJ in the second year?
     What is an investor’s net return for the second year given this fee structure?
     Solution:
      $110 million × 2% = $2.2 million management fee.

      No incentive fee because the fund has declined in value.

      Total fees to AWJ Capital = $2.2 million.

      Investor return = ($110 million − $2.2 million − $121.4 million)/$121.4 million
      = –11.20%.
     The beginning capital position in the second year for the investors is $130
     million − $8.6 million = $121.4 million. The ending capital position at the
     end of the second year is $110 million − $2.2 million = $107.8 million.

  5. In the third year, the fund value increases to $128 million. The fee structure
     is as specified in Questions 1 and 4. What are the fees earned by AWJ in the
     third year? What is an investor’s net return for the third year given this fee
     structure?
     Solution:
      $128 million × 2% = $2.56 million management fee.

      ($128 million − $121.4 million) × 20% = $1.32 million incentive fee.

      The $121.4 million represents the high-water mark established at the end of
      Year 1.

      Total fees to AWJ Capital = $3.88 million.
     Investor return = ($128 million − $3.88 million − $107.8 million)/$107.8
     million = 15.14%. The ending capital position at the end of Year 3 is $124.12
     million. This amount is the new high-water mark.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
52   Learning Module 2                                        Alternative Investment Performance and Returns



                         Relative Alternative Investment Returns and Survivorship Bias
                         Investors seeking higher risk-adjusted returns with low correlation with common
                         asset classes in alternative investments often track their performance based on relative
                         returns. As is the case for more common asset classes, returns on individual alternative
                         investments are usually compared to a benchmark of investments with similar features.
                         These benchmarks may be interpreted differently or take on different characteristics
                         in the case of alternative investments. For example, the use of a composite benchmark
                         for private equity or real estate investments may be misleading if a specific investment
                         is in a different life cycle phase than most of its peers. However, return comparisons
                         between such investments of the same vintage year on an annual or “since inception”
                         basis lead to more accurate results. That said, lockups and illiquidity may prevent an
                         investor from reacting to underperformance by selling an investment.
                              Hedge fund indexes deserve greater scrutiny given changes to the universe of
                         funds included in a benchmark over time. For example, studies suggest that over a
                         quarter of all hedge funds fail within the first three years due to performance prob-
                         lems that lead to investor defections and fund closure. The exclusion of failed funds
                         from a given benchmark is a form of selection bias that can lead investors to overly
                         optimistic return expectations known as survivorship bias. Survivorship bias is a
                         major problem among hedge fund indexes that include only current investment funds
                         and exclude those funds that are no longer available. A second form of bias relates to
                         how and when hedge fund returns are initially included in a benchmark index. For
                         example, a fund manager may launch several hedge fund investments at once and
                         include only the most successful funds in an index a couple of years after inception.
                         The subsequent inclusion or “backfilling” of prior performance data on a selective
                         basis serves to increase average reported returns in what is known as backfill bias.
                         Because of survivorship and backfill biases, hedge fund indexes may not reflect actual
                         average hedge fund performance but, rather, only the returns of those hedge funds
                         that initially performed best and/or have not failed.

                          EXAMPLE 7

                            Comparison of Returns: Investment Directly into a Hedge
                            Fund or through a Fund of Hedge Funds
                            An investor is contemplating investing €100 million in either the ABC Hedge
                            Fund (ABC HF) or the XYZ Fund of Funds (XYZ FOF). XYZ FOF has a “1 and
                            10” fee structure and invests 10% of its AUM in ABC HF. ABC HF has a standard
                            “2 and 20” fee structure with no hurdle rate. Management fees are calculated
                            on an annual basis on AUM at the beginning of the year. For simplicity, assume
                            that management fees and incentive fees are calculated independently. ABC HF
                            has a 20% return for the year before management and incentive fees.

                            1. Calculate the return to the investor from investing directly in ABC HF.
                               Solution:
                               ABC HF has a profit before fees on a €100 million investment of €20 million
                               (= €100 million × 20%). The management fee is €2 million (= €100 million ×
                               2%), and the incentive fee is €4 million (= €20 million × 20%). The return to
                               the investor is 14% [= (20 − 2 − 4)/100].

                            2. Calculate the return to the investor from investing in XYZ FOF. Assume
                               that the other investments in the XYZ FOF portfolio generate the same
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Returns                                                        53


     return before management fees as those of ABC HF and that XYZ FOF has
     the same fee structure as ABC HF.
     Solution:
     XYZ FOF earns a 14% return, or €14 million profit after fees on €100 million
     invested with hedge funds. XYZ FOF charges the investor a management
     fee of €1 million (= €100 million × 1%) and an incentive fee of €1.4 mil-
     lion (= €14 million × 10%). The return to the investor is 11.6% [= (14 − 1
     − 1.4)/100].

  3. Why would the investor choose to invest in a fund of funds instead of a
     hedge fund given the effect of the “double fee” demonstrated in the answers
     to Questions 1 and 2?
     Solution:
     This scenario assumes that returns are the same for all underlying hedge
     funds. In practice, this result will not likely be the case, and XYZ FOF may
     provide due diligence expertise and potentially valuable diversification. In
     addition, the underlying hedge fund might be closed to new investors and
     investing in the FOF may be the only way to access the hedge fund.



QUESTION SET


  1. Soft Hurdle

     A real estate investment fund has deployed $100 million initial capital to
     purchase a property. The fund has a soft hurdle preferred return to investors
     of 8% per annum and an 80%/20% carried interest incentive split thereafter
     (with a standard catch-up clause). At the end of Year 2, the property is sold
     for a total of $160 million.

     Ignoring management fees, what are the correct distributions to the LPs and
     the GP?
     Solution:
     With a soft hurdle arrangement, the carried interest is calculated on the
     entire annual gross return as long as the set hurdle is exceeded. To calculate
     the distributions of gain, one needs to construct a waterfall of cash flows.
     First, the LPs would be due their $100 million initial investment.
     Then, they would be due $16 million (8% preferred return on initial capital
     for two years).
     The soft hurdle has been met, and the GP is due the carried interest until
     20% of the profits generated is received, or $4 million (2% for two years),
     which would be paid to the GP next as a catch-up to the achieved hurdle
     return.
     The residual amount would be $160 million − $100 million − $16 million −
     $4 million = $40 million. This amount would then be split 80% to the LPs
     and 20% to the GP, or $32 million and $8 million, respectively.
     So, the total payout with a soft annual hurdle of 8% of the $160 million
     would end up with the following waterfall:
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
54   Learning Module 2                                        Alternative Investment Performance and Returns


                                                                     ​




                                                                               LP              GP

                                  Return of Capital                          $100 m
                                  8% Preferred per Annum                     $16 m
                                  GP Catch-Up 20%                                             $4 m
                                  80%/20% Split                              $32 m            $8 m
                                  Total Payout                               $148 m          $12 m
                                                                     ​




                            2. Hard Hurdle

                               Following Question 1, how would the distributions to the LPs and GP have
                               been different if the real estate investment fund had a hard hurdle of 8% per
                               annum and no catch-up clause?
                               Solution:
                               If the fund had a hard hurdle rate instead (i.e., no catch-up clause), only the
                               amount above the $100 return of capital and $16 million preferred return
                               would be subject to the 20% carried interest incentive to the GP: 20% × $44
                               million = $8.8 million—quite a bit less than the carried interest payment
                               with the soft hurdle. The LPs would be due the balance of $35.2 million (=
                               $44 million − $8.8 million incentive). This would result in the following total
                               payout:
                                                                     ​




                                                                               LP              GP

                                  Return of Capital                          $100 m
                                  8% Preferred per Annum                     $16 m
                                  80%/20% Split above Hurdle                $35.2 m          $8.8 m
                                  Total Payout                              $151.2 m          8.8 m
                                                                     ​




                            3. Calculating Net Return

                               Capricorn Fund of Funds invests GBP100 million in each of Alpha Hedge
                               Fund and ABC Hedge Fund. Capricorn Fund of Funds has a “1 and 10” fee
                               structure. Management fees and incentive fees are calculated independently
                               at the end of each year. After one year, net of their respective management
                               and incentive fees, Capricorn’s investment in Alpha is valued at GBP80
                               million and Capricorn’s investment in ABC is valued at GBP140 million.
                               The annual return to an investor in Capricorn Fund of Funds, net of fees
                               assessed at the fund-of-funds level, is closest to:
                               A. 7.9%.
                               B. 8.0%.
                                C. 8.1%.
                               Solution:
                               A is correct, because the net investor return is 7.9%, calculated as follows:
                               First, note that “1 and 10” refers to a 1% management fee and a 10% incen-
                               tive fee.
                               End-of-year capital = GBP140 million + GBP80 million = GBP220 million.

                               Management fee = GBP220 million × 1% = GBP2.2 million.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Returns                                                          55


      Incentive fee = (GBP220 million − GBP200 million) × 10% = GBP2 million.

      Total fees to Capricorn = GBP2.2 million + GBP2 million = GBP4.2 million.

      Investor net return = (GBP220 − GBP200 − GBP4.2)/GBP200 = 7.9%.
     If, however, the incentive fee is calculated after deduction of management
     fees (instead of being calculated independently), then the incentive fee
     would become (GBP220 million – GBP200 million – GBP2.2 million) × 10%
     = GBP1.78 million
     Investor net return would have become (GBP220 – GBP200 – GBP2.2 –
     GBP1.78)/GBP200 ≈ 8.0%.

  4. IRR vs. MOIC

     Match the advantages and disadvantages of IRR and MOIC as performance
     measures for long-lived alternative investments:
                                             ​




    Return
    Metrics      Advantages/Disadvantages

    1. IRR       A. ignores timing of cash flows.
                 B. considers timing of cash flows.
                 C. is more complicated to calculate.
    2. MOIC      D. is easy to calculate and understand.
                 E. requires assumptions on opportunity costs and reinvestment rates.
                 F. is the preferred measure for long-lived alternative investments.
                 G. is commonly used by private equity and real estate investors as a
                 shortcut.
                                             ​




     Solution:

      1. IRR (F) is the preferred measure for long-lived alternative invest-
         ments, because it (B) considers timing of cash flows, but it (C) is more
         complicated to calculate and (E) requires assumptions on opportunity
         costs and reinvestment rates.
      2. MOIC (G) is commonly used by private equity and real estate inves-
         tors as a shortcut, because it (D) is easy to calculate and understand,
         but it (A) ignores timing of cash flows.

  5. Either/or Fee Structure

     A closed-end infrastructure fund with initial capital of €100 million has an
     either/or fee structure under which the GP can either charge a 1% manage-
     ment fee or accept a higher 25% incentive fee, whichever is higher. All fees
     are calculated based on end-of-period net asset value. Standard high-water
     mark provisions apply.

     The fund returns for the first five years are as follows:
                                             ​




        Year                   NAV (€ millions)                Gross Return

        1                            98.00                          -2%
        2                            93.10                          -5%
                            © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
56     Learning Module 2                                         Alternative Investment Performance and Returns



                                       Year                   NAV (€ millions)                 Gross Return
                                       3                          108.00                           16%
                                       4                          129.60                           20%
                                       5                          176.26                           36%
                                                                             ​




                                    Please calculate the fees received by the GP for each of the five years.
                                    Solution:
                                    The management and incentive fees that can be received by the GP in each
                                    year are tabulated as follows:
                                                                                                                                 ​




            NAV            Gross                                                                               Total Fee
Year    (€ millions)       Return     Management Fee (%)                   Incentive Fee (%)                  (€ millions)

1          98.00            –2%                 1%                                —                              0.98
2          93.10            –5%                 1%                                —                              0.93
                                                                                  25%
3         108.00            16%                 —                          (108 – 100) × 25%                     2.00
                                                                                25%
4         129.60            20%                 —                      (129.6 – 108.0) × 25%                     5.40
                                                                                25%
5         176.26            36%                 —                     (176.26 – 129.60) × 25%                    11.67
                                                                            Cumulative fees                      20.98
                                                                                                                             ​




                                    Note that because the fund made a loss in Year 1 and in Year 2, there is no
                                    incentive fee and the GP can receive only the 1% management fee. In Year
                                    3, when the fund made a profit, the incentive fee can be charged on the gain
                                    above the last high-water mark, which was the initial €100 million in Year
                                    0. Since the management fee for Year 3 would have been just €1.08 million
                                    (= €108 million × 1%), the GP will be better off receiving the incentive fee
                                    of €2 million. Likewise, for Years 4 and 5, the GP can choose to receive the
                                    incentive fee at 25% of the profits in those two years without earning any
                                    management fee.

                                  6. Hedge Fund Indexes

                                    A common problem with hedge fund indexes is the upward bias due to:
                                     A. backfill bias only.
                                     B. survivorship bias only.
                                     C. both backfill and survivorship bias.
                                    Solution:
                                    C is correct. Both backfill bias and survivorship bias are common in hedge
                                    fund indexes.
                                    Survivorship bias refers to the selection bias in the index due to the exclu-
                                    sion of failed funds from a given benchmark. It leads to overly optimistic
                                    return expectations. Backfill bias refers to hedge funds including only the
                                    most successful funds in an index a few years after inception. The subse-
                                    quent inclusion or “backfilling” of prior performance data on a selective
                                    basis serves to increase average reported returns. Both of these biases result
                                    in an upward bias in hedge fund indexes because they may reflect not actual
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Alternative Investment Returns                                                        57


     average hedge fund performance but, rather, only the returns of those funds
     that initially performed best and/or have not failed.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
58   Learning Module 2                                        Alternative Investment Performance and Returns




                             PRACTICE PROBLEMS
                         1. The following information applies to Rotunda Advisers, a hedge fund:
                             ■   $288 million in AUM as of prior year end
                             ■   2% management fee (based on year-end AUM)
                             ■   20% incentive fee calculated:

                                 ●   Net of management fee
                                 ●   Using a 5% soft hurdle rate
                                 ●   Using a high-water mark (high-water mark is $357 million)
                             ■   Current-year fund gross return is 25%.
                             The total fee earned by Rotunda in the current year is closest to:
                             A. $7.20 million.

                             B. $20.16 million.

                             C. $21.60 million.

                         2. A hedge fund with net capital of GBP500 million has borrowed an additional
                            GBP200 million at 4.5% per annum. The current-year return of the fund is 15%.
                            What would have been the return if the fund had not added any leverage?
                             A. 10.7%

                             B. 12.0%

                             C. 19.2%

                         3. A common problem for the “mark-to-model” valuation of private equity funds is
                            most likely:
                             A. a violation of accounting rules.

                             B. an understatement of portfolio risk.

                             C. an understatement of interim portfolio return.

                         4. A commodity hedge fund has three investors:
                             ■   €100 million from Investor A invested at Year 0,
                             ■   €100 million from Investor B invested at the beginning of Year 2, and
                             ■   €100 million from Investor C invested at the beginning of Year 3.
                             The gross returns before fees of the fund are as follows:

                                                           Investor A’s       Investor B’s        Investor C’s
                                       Annual Gross        Investment         Investment          Investment
                         Year            Return            (€ millions)       (€ millions)        (€ millions)

                         0                  —                    100                                  —
                         1                 20%                   —                                    —
                         2                 –15%                  —                100                 —
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Practice Problems                                                                              59



                                        Investor A’s     Investor B’s          Investor C’s
              Annual Gross              Investment       Investment            Investment
Year            Return                  (€ millions)     (€ millions)          (€ millions)
3                   15%                     —                                      100
4                   10%                     —                                       —

    The management fee is 2% based on end-of-year value. The incentive fee is 20%
    above the high-water mark and is calculated based on end-of-year value net of
    management fee.
    Which investor has earned the highest net return after the end of Year 4?
    A. Investor A

    B. Investor B

    C. Investor C



The following information relates to questions
5-6
    Buyout Capital, LLC, is a private equity fund that has the following
    characteristics:
    ■   Capital committed: $200 million
    ■   Preferred return: 8% soft hurdle, with full catch-up
    ■   Fund distribution: after five years
    ■   Management fee: none
    ■   Carried interest: 20% above preferred return
    ■   Waterfall structure: American (deal by deal) with clawback
    The fund made five investments, tabulated as follows:

                          Year                  Amount ($ m)                   Profit
Investment
No.             Invested         Sold         Invested   Sold           $m               %

1                    0            4              40       60            20          10.67%
2                    0            4              40       100           60          25.74%
3                    1            5              40       50            10          5.74%
4                    1            5              40       120           80          31.61%
5                    2            5              40       30            (10)            neg.
Total                                           200      360            160         12.47%


5. What is the total carried interest to the GP?
    A. $30 million

    B. $32 million

    C. $34 million

6. Buyout Capital, LLC, is a private equity fund that has the following
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
60   Learning Module 2                                        Alternative Investment Performance and Returns


                             characteristics:
                             ■   Capital committed: $200 million
                             ■   Preferred return: 8% soft hurdle, with full catch-up
                             ■   Fund distribution: after five years
                             ■   Management fee: none
                             ■   Carried interest: 20% above preferred return
                             ■   Waterfall structure: European (whole of fund)
                             The fund made five investments that are tabulated as follows:

                                                    Year                Amount ($ m)                Profit

                         Investment No.    Invested        Sold        Invested   Sold       $m              %

                         1                      0           4            40       60         20        10.67%
                         2                      0           4            40       100        60        25.74%
                         3                      1           5            40       50         10         5.74%
                         4                      1           5            40       120        80         31.61%
                         5                      2           5            40       30         (10)        neg.
                         Total                                           200      360        160       12.47%

                             What is the total carried interest to the GP?
                             A. $30 million

                             B. $32 million

                             C. $34 million


                         7. A hedge fund has the following fee structure:
                             ■   Annual management fee based on year-end AUM: 2%
                             ■   Incentive fee: 20%
                             ■   Hurdle rate before incentive fee collection starts: 4%
                             ■   Current high-water mark: $610 million
                             The fund has a value of $583.1 million at the beginning of the year. After one year,
                             it has a value of $642 million before fees. The net percentage return to an investor
                             for this year is closest to:
                             A. 6.72%.

                             B. 6.80%.

                             C. 7.64%.
                                        © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Solutions                                                                                                61




   SOLUTIONS
1. A is correct. Although the gross return of Rotunda results in a $360 million gross
   NAV, the deduction of the $7.2 million management fee brings NAV to $352.8
   million, which is below the prior high-water mark. Rotunda earns a management
   fee of $7.20 million but does not earn an incentive fee because the year-end fund
   value net of management fee does not exceed the prior high-water mark of $357
   million. Since Rotunda is still also below the prior-year high-water mark, the
   hurdle rate of return is also basically irrelevant in this fee calculation.
   The specifics of this calculation are as follows:

          End-of-year AUM = Prior year-end AUM × (1 + Fund return) = $288 mil-
          lion × 1.25 = $360 million.
          $360 million × 2% = $7.20 million management fee.
          $360 million − $7.2 million = $352.8 million AUM net of management fee.
   The year-end AUM net of fees do not exceed the $357 million high-water mark.
   Therefore, no incentive fee is earned.

2. B is correct.
   Using Equation 2,
   rL = Leveraged portfolio return/Cash position = [r × (Vb+Vc) – (Vb × rb)]/Vc.

   Or, after re-arranging the formula,

         (​ ​Vc​ ​× ​r​L )​ ​+ (​ ​Vb​ ​× ​r​b)​ ​
   	​r = ________________
           
         ​         ​(  
                     ​V​ ​+ ​V​ ​)​              .​
                         c        b


   Substituting rL = 0.15, Vb = 200, Vc = 500, rb = 0.045,

   r = (500 × 0.15) + (200 × 0.045)/(200 + 500) = 12%.
   Since leverage magnifies return when the borrowing cost is lower than asset
   returns, the unleveraged asset return must be lower than 15%.

3. B is correct. Accounting rules require that investments be recorded at their fair
   value for financial reporting purposes. The fair value of private equity that owns
   illiquid assets requires certain estimates, rather than observable transaction
   prices, to be factored into valuation. A model that relies on Level 3 inputs may
   reflect an imperfect theoretical valuation and not a true liquidation value. The
   lack of new market information over time may anchor the interim valuation at or
   near initial cost. The relatively stable accounting valuations may give investors a
   false sense that they are less volatile. At the same time, there is a potential conflict
   of interest for the GP to overstate interim return because of the implication for
   carried interest. As a result, returns may be smoothed or overstated and the vola-
   tility of returns understated.

4. C is correct. Despite investing for the shortest period of time in the fund (i.e.,
   two years), Investor C has earned the highest net return compared to the other
   two investors. The following table illustrates the calculations based on the “2 and
   20” fee structure and the high-water marks facing each investor in any particular
   year; in each case, the incentive fee is calculated using Equation 8:
   RGP(High-Water Mark) = (P2 × rm) + max[0, (P2 – PHWM) × p].
                                 © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
62         Learning Module 2                                          Alternative Investment Performance and Returns


                                        The net return is calculated using Equation 9:

                                        ri = (P2 – P1 – RGP)/P1.

               Annual
                Gross     Investor A’s       Year-End AUM           High-Water           Management     Incentive         Year-End AUM
Year           Return     Investment          (Before Fee)             Mark               Fee (2%)      Fee (20%)           (After Fee)

                                                                                                                          (Before Fee)
0                 —            100.00            100.00                    —                 —             —                   100.00
1                20%            —                120.00                  100.00             2.40          3.52                 114.08
2               -15%            —                96.97                   114.08             1.94           —                   95.03
3                15%            —                109.28                  114.08             2.19           —                   107.10
4                10%            —                117.81                  114.08             2.36          0.27                 115.18
Investor A's net return                                                                                                        15.18%

               Annual
                Gross     Investor B’s       Year-End AUM           High-Water           Management     Incentive         Year-End AUM
Year           Return     Investment          (Before Fee)             Mark               Fee (2%)      Fee (20%)          (Before Fee)

0                 —             —                  —                       —                 —             —                     —
1                20%            —                  —                       —                 —             —                     —
2               -15%           100.00            85.00                   100.00             1.70           —                   83.30
3                15%                             95.80                   100.00             1.92           —                   93.88
4                10%            —                103.27                  100.00             2.07          0.24                 100.96
Investor B's net return                                                                                                        0.96%

               Annual
                Gross     Investor C’s       Year-End AUM           High-Water           Management     Incentive         Year-End AUM
Year           Return     Investment          (Before Fee)             Mark               Fee (2%)      Fee (20%)          (Before Fee)

0                 —             —                  —                       —                 —             —                     —
1                20%            —                  —                       —                 —             —                     —
2               -15%            —                  —                       —                 —             —                     —
3                15%           100.00            115.00                  100.00             2.30          2.54                 110.16
4                10%            —                121.18                  110.16             2.42          1.72                 117.03
Investor C's Net Return                                                                                                        17.03%


                                  5. A is correct. The distribution of profit of each investment is as follows:

                                                             Year                 Amount ($ m)                   Profit

                                  Investment                                                                         LPs at       GP at
                                  No.             Invested          Sold       Invested Sold       $m      %          80%         20%

                                  1                      0           4              40      60     20    10.67%           16           4
                                  2                      0           4              40     100     60    25.74%           48         12
                                  3                      1           5              40      50     10    5.74%            10           0
                                  4                      1           5              40     120     80    31.61%           64         16
                        © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Solutions                                                                                    63



                       Year           Amount ($ m)                    Profit

Investment                                                                LPs at     GP at
No.           Invested        Sold   Invested Sold     $m       %          80%       20%
5                  2           5        40       30    (10)    neg.            (8)    (2)
Total                                  200      360    160    12.47%       130        30

    Since the preferred return of the LP is 8%, Investments 1, 2, and 4 all meet the
    criterion and the profit is split 80/20 between the LPs and GP. Investment 3 does
    not earn the GP any carry because it fails to meet the preferred return; neither
    does Investment 5, whose profit is negative. Because of the clawback clause, the
    GP’s carry is reduced by $2 million (or 20% of the loss on Investment 5). There-
    fore, the total carried interest adds up to $30 million, or 30/160 = 18.75% of the
    total profit made by the fund.

6. B is correct. A European waterfall occurs at the aggregate fund level. As long as
   the fund exit IRR exceeds 8% after five years, the GP will be eligible for the full
   20% carried interest on the profit made from all investments—that is, $160 mil-
   lion × 20% = $32 million.

                       Year           Amount ($ m)                    Profit

Investment                                                                 LPs at    GP at
No.           Invested        Sold   Invested   Sold   $m       %           80%      20%

1                 0            4       40       60     20     10.67%
2                 0            4       40       100    60     25.74%
3                 1            5       40       50     10      5.74%
4                 1            5       40       120    80     31.61%
5                 2            5       40       30     (10)    neg.
Total                                  200      360    160    12.47%           128    32


7. C is correct. The management fee for the year is $642 million × 0.02 = $12.84
   million.
   Because the ending gross value of the fund of $642 million exceeds the
   high-water mark of $610 million, the hedge fund can collect an incentive fee on
   gains above this high-water mark but net of the hurdle rate of return. The incen-
   tive fee calculation becomes
    {$642 – [$610 × (1 + 0.04)]} × 0.20 = $1.52 million.
    The net return to the investor for the year is
    [($642 – $12.84 – $1.52)/$583.1] – 1 = 0.07638 ≈ 7.64%.
© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.




LEARNING MODULE


3
Investments in Private Capital:
Equity and Debt
 LEARNING OUTCOMES
  Mastery     The candidate should be able to:

              explain features of private equity and its investment characteristics
              explain features of private debt and its investment characteristics
              describe the diversification benefits that private capital can provide




INTRODUCTION
This Learning Module and the subsequent four Learning Modules explain the invest-
                                                                                             1
ment characteristics of specific alternative asset types, starting with private equity and
private debt. The subsequent Learning Modules focus on real assets, natural resources,
hedge funds, and digital assets. Each Learning Module introduces core characteristics,
distinguishing features, and risk–return characteristics for the specific asset class.
Alternative assets differ from the traditional asset classes—debt and equity—due to
their unique return, risk, and information profiles and historically show low levels
of correlation with debt and equity. Moreover, alternative assets often require highly
specialized knowledge to select, manage, and divest these assets. Since these alter-
native assets are generally considered to be less liquid than traditional asset classes,
understanding the valuation and return characteristics is a specialized skill.

   LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW

       ■   Private equity is a form of private capital funding sourced from
           outside public markets through non-traditional sources, such
           as venture capital and leveraged buyout firms. It can be injected at
           various stages of business development, from initial idea to final tran-
           sition to public company status.
       ■   The duration of a private equity investment also varies, with funds
           conducting their exits typically by the strategies of trade sales to
           strategic buyers or public listings through IPOs or special acquisition
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
66   Learning Module 3                                         Investments in Private Capital: Equity and Debt


                                    companies (SPACs). Other strategies include recapitalizations, second-
                                    ary sales, and liquidations, with all the strategies having their unique
                                    advantages and drawbacks.
                                ■   Compared to traditional investments, private equity can offer better
                                    returns combined with higher risks. This contrast is a function of
                                    private equity’s distinct choice set, greater management control, and
                                    greater leverage. Data ambiguities make it challenging to reliably mea-
                                    sure the benefits of private equity investing.
                                ■   Private debt primarily refers to the various forms of debt provided
                                    by investors directly to private entities. Its four major categories are
                                    direct lending, mezzanine loans, venture debt, and distressed debt,
                                    and it also includes unitranche debt of blended loans and other spe-
                                    cialty loans.
                                ■   As in private equity investment, private debt can be arranged on a
                                    direct or indirect basis, with funds deployed over the corporate life
                                    cycle straight from an investor or intermediated through a fund.
                                    Investors receive interest payments and the return of principal after a
                                    designated term, with debt typically secured and having protections/
                                    covenants.
                                ■   Private debt has potentially higher returns and risks than traditional
                                    fixed income, with its investors needing specialized knowledge to
                                    adjust exposures for differences across company funding stages, debt
                                    structures, and underlying assets.
                                ■   Private debt and equity are distinct in terms of risks and performance
                                    from their public counterparts due to illiquidity and concentration
                                    risk and to the often-greater uncertainties of both their underlying
                                    businesses and the means to hedge away their risks. And a fundamen-
                                    tal timing characteristic for private capital is its vintage year, with the
                                    valuation and economic environment at the origin of a private equity
                                    fund having a potentially substantial effect on realized results over the
                                    fund’s set lifespan.
                                ■   To offset the potentially adverse performance effects of an ill-timed
                                    fund launch at an unfavorable stage of the business cycle, investors can
                                    diversify exposure across fund vintage years.
                                ■   Investments in private capital vary in terms of risk and return across
                                    the corporate capital structure hierarchy, with a diversified mix of pri-
                                    vate equity and debt investments potentially balancing private capital
                                    risks and returns. And when combined with public stocks and bonds,
                                    investments in private capital funds can add a moderate diversification
                                    benefit with opportunities for excess returns due to private capital’s
                                    additional leverage, market, and liquidity risks.



                          SELF-ASSESSMENT

                            These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
                            of understanding of this learning module.

                            1. At the conclusion of a public company’s leveraged buyout, the amount of its
                               market-traded stock is substantially:
                                A. reduced.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Introduction                                                                           67


      B. increased.
      C. unaffected.
     Solution:
     A is correct. After the transaction, the target company becomes or remains
     a privately owned company. Leveraged buyouts are sometimes called “go-
     ing-private” transactions because after the acquisition of a publicly traded
     company, the target company’s equity is substantially no longer publicly
     traded.

  2. Which of the following financing tools would most likely be used at the later
     stage of venture capital investment?
      A. Common stock
      B. Preferred stock
      C. Convertible debt
     Solution:
     B is correct. Preferred stock can be deployed as late into a company’s ma-
     turity as later-stage venture capital, when preferred stock can offer more
     protection to venture investors as a company transitions toward an IPO. A
     and C are incorrect because these instruments are more typically used in the
     earlier pre-seed and seed stages.

  3. Which of the following transaction features is associated with mezzanine
     debt?
      A. Warrants
      B. Lines of credit
      C. Fixed payment schedules
     Solution:
     A is correct. Mezzanine debt often comes with additional features, such as
     warrants or conversion rights. These provide equity participation to lenders/
     investors. B is incorrect because lines of credit are associated with venture
     debt, which entrepreneurs may seek to obtain additional financing without
     further diluting shareholder ownership. C is incorrect because fixed pay-
     ment schedules are associated with direct lending, in which, as with typical
     bank loans, payments are usually received on a fixed schedule.

  4. In using private debt for a syndicated leveraged mortgage portfolio, the
     financial ratio of loan to value (LTV) is important at:
      A. origination and to the real estate fund sponsor.
      B. syndication and to the private debt fund lender.
      C. both transaction phases and to each of the parties.
     Solution:
     C is correct. LTV plays a significant role in both legs of this transaction.
     For a sponsor to be able to borrow and for a lender to be able syndicate the
     loans, the aggregate LTV ratio cannot be breached, and any deviation from
     LTV on an individual property level needs to be cured. As the loan amortiz-
     es, its outstanding principal declines, increasing LTV. However, if the value
     of the real estate were to drop, then the sponsor will be required to raise
     additional collateral to maintain the LTV level.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
68   Learning Module 3                                         Investments in Private Capital: Equity and Debt


                            5. Vintage diversification is an advisable policy for implementation by private
                               capital:
                                A. funds.
                                B. investors.
                                C. users, such as company managers.
                               Solution:
                               B is correct. The vintage year, the time when fund deployment begins, is
                               important for comparing PE and VC investments with other funds in the
                               same year. Because of changing business and valuation environments, funds
                               of a certain vintage have a relative advantage based on their start-up timing.
                               That is why investors are encouraged to pursue vintage diversification by
                               investing in multiple vintage years. A is incorrect because once capital
                               commitments from a fund begin, all subsequent transactions are classi-
                               fied as part of the same vintage year. C is incorrect because the terms and
                               conditions of capital use are more a function of the circumstances of their
                               company than of the origin point of their fund source.

                            6. The potential diversification benefits from private capital investment are
                               most likely related to its:
                                A. wide range of exit strategies.
                                B. various types of fee structures.
                                C. lower correlation with public asset returns.
                               Solution:
                               C is correct. Investments in private capital funds can add a moderate diver-
                               sification benefit to a portfolio of publicly traded stocks and bonds. Cor-
                               relations with public market indexes vary from 0.63 to 0.83. A is incorrect
                               because different exit strategies can offer funds the opportunity to maximize
                               returns but do not necessarily reduce the volatility of returns over time. B is
                               incorrect because while different fee structures may more effectively align
                               the interests of funds and their investors, they do not necessarily change the
                               risks of the underlying investments.




             2           PRIVATE EQUITY INVESTMENT CHARACTERISTICS

                                       explain features of private equity and its investment characteristics

                         Private capital is the broad term for funding provided to companies that is not sourced
                         from the public markets, such as from the sale of equities, bonds, and other securities
                         on exchanges, or from traditional institutional providers, such as a government or
                         bank. Capital raised from sources other than public markets and traditional institu-
                         tions and in the form of an equity investment is called private equity. Comparably
                         sourced capital extended to companies through a loan or other form of debt is referred
                         to as private debt. Private capital relates to the entire capital structure, comprising
                         private equity and private debt.
                             Private equity strategies include leveraged buyout (LBO), venture capital (VC),
                         and growth capital. Leveraged buyouts, or highly leveraged transactions, arise when
                         private equity firms establish buyout funds (or LBO funds) to acquire public companies
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Private Equity Investment Characteristics                                                   69


or established private companies, with a significant percentage of the purchase price
financed through debt. The target company’s assets typically serve as collateral for the
debt, and the target company’s cash flows are expected to be sufficient to service the
debt. The debt becomes part of the target company’s capital structure after the buyout
occurs. After the transaction, the target company becomes or remains a privately owned
company. LBOs are sometimes called “going private” transactions because after the
acquisition of a publicly traded company, the target company’s equity is substantially
no longer publicly traded.
    The LBO may also be of a specific type. In a management buyout (MBO), the
current management team participates in the acquisition, and in a management buy-in
(MBI), the current management team is replaced with the acquiring team involved
in managing the company. LBO managers seek to add value by improving company
operations, boosting revenue, and ultimately increasing profits and cash flows. Cash
flow growth, in order of contribution, comes from organic revenue growth, cost reduc-
tions and restructuring, acquisitions, and then all other sources. The financial returns
in this category, however, depend greatly on the use of leverage. If debt financing is
unavailable or costly, LBOs become less attractive and are less likely to take place. As
business conditions and the availability of financing change, private equity managers
may change focus.
    A manager may manage many private equity funds, each composed of several
investments, and the companies owned are called portfolio companies because they
will be part of a private equity fund portfolio.
    There are certain similarities and differences between private equity and public
equity. Both types of equity represent direct ownership and control of the corporation.
Owners are shareholders and as such have voting rights at the annual general meeting
of shareholders electing the board, setting strategy, and making impactful decisions
for the future of the company. Additionally, all owners have a direct and proportional
claim to residual cash flow rights in the form of dividends. Ultimately, because of
significant shareholdings, private equity ownership allows more direct control over
decisions than public equity. Because of this, managing a direct private investment
exposure requires specialized knowledge specific to the industry and sector the firm
is in. Capital gains are typically the largest driver of returns, either through price
appreciation or from free cash flow generated by the holdings.
    Equity investment, whether in public or private companies, has historically exhibited
higher returns at the expense of greater risk compared with debt. The potential pay
off for equity investors is unlimited upside with the downside limited to the amount
invested. However, there are some differences as well.


Private Equity Investment Categories
Private equity investments can be direct, through a single private equity fund, or indi-
rect, through a fund-of-funds vehicle with stakes in various other private funds. With
a direct private equity investment, the investment is made in a single, specific asset,
but there may also be co-investments where the investor will participate alongside a
lead sponsor who sources, structures, and executes the transaction.
     Non-public equity is often categorized by the investor’s entry point in a company’s
life cycle (venture capital versus private equity), as Exhibit 1 shows.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
70   Learning Module 3                                         Investments in Private Capital: Equity and Debt



                            Exhibit 1: Private and Venture Capital across the Corporate Life Cycle
                            Stages
                                                Seed equity capital, convertible preferred,            Public and private equity; public and
                                                       multiple financing series                                   private debt

                             Life cycle stage       Seed               Start-up               Growth             Maturity               Decline

                                 Revenues           None             Low to none          Increasing      Positive, predictable        Declining

                                 Cash flow        Negative             Negative           Increasing      Positive, predictable        Declining

                              Business risk       Very high              High                  High                Low                 Increasing


                                                           Venture capital opportunity                    Private equity opportunity

                                                                                      Privately held company

                                                                                                         IPO

                                                                                                                 Publicly traded

                                                                                                                     Buy-out, taking private, LBO




                         Venture capital entails investing in or providing financing to private companies with
                         high growth potential. Typically, these are start-ups or young companies, but venture
                         capital can be injected at various stages, ranging from concept creation for a company
                         or near the point of a company’s IPO (initial public offering) launch or its acquisition.
                         The investment return required varies with the company’s stage of development.
                         Investors in early-stage companies will demand higher expected returns relative to
                         later-stage investors because the earlier the stage of development, the higher the risk.
                             Venture capitalists, like all private equity managers, are active investors directly
                         involved with their portfolio companies.
                             VC funds typically invest in companies and receive an equity interest but may
                         also provide financing in the form of debt (commonly, convertible debt). Exhibit 2
                         summarizes the financing stages at different phases of the venture.



                            Exhibit 2: Stages of Venture Capital

                         Stage                  Pre-seed                    Seed                       Early stage | Later stage
                         Investors              • Founders                  • Seed funds               • Venture capital funds
                                                • Friends and               • Angel investors          • Corporate venture funds
                                                family                                                 • Private equity investors
                                                • Angel investors                                      • Strategic investors
                         Typical invest-        USD5k–USD500k USD25k–                                  USD5mil+
                         ment amount                          USD5mil
                         Source of              Mainly                      Funds                      • Institutional investors
                         capital                individuals                                            • Family offices
                                                                                                       • Strategic investors


                             ■     Pre-seed capital, or angel investing, is capital provided at the idea stage.
                                   Funds may be used to develop a business plan and to assess market poten-
                                   tial. The amount of financing here is typically small and sourced from indi-
                                   viduals, often friends and family, rather than by VC funds.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Private Equity Investment Characteristics                                                   71


   ■   Seed-stage financing, or seed capital, generally supports product develop-
       ment and marketing efforts, including market research. This is the first stage
       at which VC funds usually invest.
   ■   Early-stage financing (early-stage VC), or start-up stage financing, goes to
       companies moving toward operation but prior to commercial production or
       sales, in both of which early-stage financing may be injected to initiate.
   ■   Later-stage financing (expansion VC) comes after commercial production
       and sales have begun but before an IPO. Funds may be used to support
       initial growth, a major expansion (such as a physical plant upgrade), product
       improvements, or a major marketing campaign.
    Later-stage financing generally involves management selling control of the company
to the VC investor; financing is provided through equity and debt, although the fund
may also use convertible bonds or convertible preferred shares. The VC fund offers
debt financing for reasons of recovery and the control of assets in a bankruptcy situ-
ation, not to generate income. Simply put, debt financing affords the VC fund more
protection than equity does.
    Mezzanine-stage financing (mezzanine venture capital) prepares a company
to go public as it continues to expand capacity and enhance its growth trajectory.
It represents the bridge financing needed to fund a private firm until it can execute
an IPO or be sold. The term mezzanine-stage financing is used because it is infused
between private and public company status, principally distinguished by the timing of
the financing rather than its method. While the terms sound quite similar, mezzanine
financing is different from mezzanine-stage financing. Mezzanine financing relates
to the use of equity–debt hybrid instruments, such as convertible debt or convertible
preferred. Mezzanine-stage financing can use mezzanine financing, but typically at
this stage the main financing is either equity-like (to capture potential gains from the
planned IPO) or short-term debt.
    Convertible preferred shares are often used in start-ups to raise private capital
from venture capital funds. Since convertible preferred shares include an option for
the holder to convert the preferred shares into a fixed number of common shares
after a predetermined date and in some cases at a predetermined price, they provide
incentive alignment between the entrepreneurs in the start-up and the investor. The
conversion value is ultimately based on the valuation of the start-up. Investing in
a start-up is risky because the investor is financing a new and unproven business.
Preferred convertible equity provides investors with additional protections that are
not available to common shareholders. Most importantly, in the event of a liquidation,
preferred convertible shareholders have seniority over common shareholders and are
entitled to recover the entire value of their investment before common shareholders
receive any of the proceeds.
    When investing, the manager of the venture capital fund is largely confident that the
portfolio company’s management team is competent and armed with a solid business
plan showing strong prospects for growth. Because these companies are immature
businesses without years of operational and financial performance history, estimating
company valuations and their future prospects is highly subjective.
    Once venture capital sees an exit opportunity, private equity can take over. Private
equity firms specialized in the later-stage life cycle phase seek to generate returns by
directly influencing management and implementing strategy changes, particularly
for both publicly traded and privately held companies that are underperforming
their peers. Here, private equity focuses on increasing the value of the core business
by adaptively changing the overall business strategy by eliminating poor-performing
business lines or businesses that do not generate sufficiently high returns. These
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
72   Learning Module 3                                         Investments in Private Capital: Equity and Debt


                         strategic changes can generate value that can be extracted either from the assets in
                         place (selling underperforming assets) or by creating a more sustainable strategy and
                         selling the company at a higher valuation.
                             Established companies in a transition phase may seek minority equity interest to
                         expand, restructure, or acquire other companies. A private equity firm that engages
                         in minority equity investing, also known as growth equity or growth capital, takes
                         a less-than-controlling interest in more mature companies looking for capital to
                         expand or restructure operations, enter new markets, or finance major acquisitions.
                         Many times, minority equity investing is initiated and sought by the management of
                         the investee company. The management’s motive is to realize earnings from selling
                         a portion of its shares before the company can go public but still retain control and
                         participation in the success of the company. Although this scenario occurs most
                         commonly with private companies, publicly quoted companies can seek private equity
                         capital through PIPEs (private investments in public equities).

                          EXAMPLE 1

                            Tenderledge and Arguston—Buyout
                            A private equity firm, Tenderledge Opportunity Fund LLC, is evaluating Arguston
                            Inc. Arguston is a mid-sized manufacturing firm operating in a mature industry
                            and has seen both its revenues and earnings drop. Arguston does not have the
                            needed capital to make the necessary long-term investments in technological
                            upgrades to maintain its competitiveness or to recapture and extend its dwindling
                            market share. The company is closely held, but the current owners and its man-
                            agement do not have the financial capacity to make the necessary investments
                            and are willing to be bought out by Tenderledge.
                                To make the investment in Arguston, Tenderledge would not only provide
                            needed capital but also restructure Arguston’s operations to create efficiencies
                            by reducing unnecessary redundancies and streamlining production, opera-
                            tions, and administration. It would likely replace management and install its
                            own board members.
                                Tenderledge is likely to reduce overhead costs and cut employment levels.
                            Once the restructuring and technological investments bear fruit, Tenderledge
                            may also opt to consider acquiring some of Arguston’s competitors to create
                            additional growth through economies of scale and scope. Ultimately, the objec-
                            tive is to increase the value of Arguston and exit from the investment at a much
                            higher price.

                             A PIPE (private investment in public equity) transaction is a private offering
                         to select investors with fewer disclosures and lower transaction costs that allows the
                         issuer to raise capital more quickly and cost effectively than with other means that
                         may be more regulated, expensive, and lengthy. In a traditional PIPE transaction,
                         either newly issued common stock or shares sold by existing stockholders—or a
                         combination of both—in an already-publicly traded company are made available to
                         certain investors. These investors, typically investment firms, mutual funds, or other
                         institutional investors, enter into a definitive purchase agreement with the issuer and
                         commit to purchase securities at a fixed price. These transactions are common in
                         work-out or rescue situations where there is a material difference in the market price
                         and valuations. A special case of PIPE is capital raised through convertible debt or
                         convertible preferred stock. PIPE transactions are also dilutive to existing shareholders,
                         and the new investors require a discount to market on the purchase price, which can
                         introduce incentive conflicts between existing shareholders and new shareholders.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Private Equity Investment Characteristics                                               73


EXPEDIA AND PIPE DURING COVID-19

  Private investment in public equity often signals confidence in a company’s
  prospects and offers companies an accelerated approach to raise capital by sell-
  ing large chunks of its equity to investors who often take board seats to directly
  get involved in setting business strategy. But these transactions can be costly.
      In March 2020, the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic led to a severe
  decline in travel, creating crisis conditions for the industry. Expedia, an online
  business and retail travel platform operating several brands, sold USD1.2 billion
  of preferred shares to two private equity managers, gave each firm a seat on its
  board, and issued USD2 billion of additional debt.
      The preferred shares pay a fixed rate of 9.5% and warrants to purchase
  common stock. All in all, Expedia accumulated over USD4 billion in liquidity
  to weather the business disruption caused by the pandemic.
      Expedia may redeem these preferred shares at preset prices during certain
  time periods and at preset periods.
                                                ​




    Time period                                               Redemption price

    Up to the first year of issuance                                105.0%
    Between first and second year of issuance                       103.0%
    Between second and third year of issuance                       102.0%
    Between third and fourth year of issuance                       101.0%
    After the fourth year of issuance                               100.0%
                                                ​




  When redeeming these shares, Expedia also has to pay any unpaid and accrued
  dividends. Additionally, Expedia also issued warrants to purchase 8.4 million
  shares of common equity at an exercise price of USD72.00 per share; these
  warrants have an expiration of 10 years.
      Finally, Expedia also issued debt with an aggregate principal amount up to
  USD855 million. Its euro-denominated debt paid up to a 2.35% annual interest
  rate until 31 December 2021 and after that date paid up to 1.75%.
      Assuming the adverse business conditions recovered fairly quickly to enable
  Expedia redemption of the financing at the midpoint (2 years) of the term sheet
  and it had not paid any preferred dividends beforehand, Expedia’s cost would be
  [(1.02) + (0.095 × 2)](USD1.2 billion) = USD1.45 billion, or USD250 million in
  excess of the preferred fund raise, plus the potential dilutive effects on earnings
  of 8.4 million extra common shares if their market price exceeded the USD72
  warrant exercise price. As a benchmark comparison, the dividend yield of the
  largest US market preferred ETF, iShares Preferred and Income Securities, was
  approximately 5.6% in the summer of 2020, a substantially lower yield.



Private Equity Exit Strategies
Private equity firms seek to improve new or underperforming businesses and then exit
them at higher valuations, buying and holding companies for an average of five years.
Holding time, however, can range from less than six months to more than 10 years.
Before deciding on an exit strategy, private equity managers assess the dynamics of
the industry in which the portfolio company competes, the overall economic cycle,
interest rates, and company performance.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
74   Learning Module 3                                         Investments in Private Capital: Equity and Debt


                             Instead of a long-term buy-and-hold strategy that managers and owners of publicly
                         held equity funds espouse, private equity seeks to aggressively maximize investment
                         return by selling or even auctioning holdings in private assets to the highest bidder.
                         The added value that private equity investors can realize by strategically connecting
                         firms and entities can further increase the value of the transaction and the returns to
                         the private equity investors.
                             Typically, a private equity fund has an investment period of approximately five
                         years and a subsequent harvesting period when exit occurs and the valuation envi-
                         ronment becomes more relevant. Moreover, private equity fund investments are not
                         made in one single payment but are spread over time using committed capital over
                         several years, which provides managers a great deal of flexibility to optimize when
                         their entry and exit points occur.
                             There are two main exit strategies: trade sale and public listing, which can take
                         the form of IPOs, direct listings, or SPACs

                         Trade Sale
                         There are two main exit strategies: trade sale and public listing. In a trade sale, a
                         portion or a division of the private company is sold either via direct sale or auction
                         to a strategic buyer interested in increasing the scale and scope of the existing busi-
                         ness. Because the transaction may have an impact on the competitive environment,
                         it may face regulatory scrutiny and approval or management or employee resistance.
                             A key advantage of a trade sale is that a strategic investor will be willing to pay a
                         premium as they price in potential synergies with their existing business. Other advan-
                         tages of a trade sale include the relatively fast and simple execution of the transaction,
                         which compared with an IPO may be shorter and incur lower transaction costs. Since
                         these are privately negotiated transactions, there is a higher confidentiality because
                         there are just a few parties involved in the transaction or the auction. Additionally,
                         the strategic buyers can better evaluate the fit with their existing business without
                         external scrutiny, which potentially makes strategic buyers willing to pay more from
                         anticipating synergies with their own business.
                             The disadvantages of trade sales include potential resistance from existing members
                         of management, who may fear their job security and may wish to avoid ownership by
                         a competitor. Similarly, management and employees may resist a private transaction
                         because a public listing would monetize the shares and potentially attain a higher sale
                         price. Finally, the universe of trade buyers may be limited, which can potentially raise
                         regulatory scrutiny and reduce prices.

                          EXAMPLE 2

                            Tenderledge and Arguston—Exit
                            After Tenderledge Opportunity Fund LLC, bought out Arguston Inc., the mid-
                            sized manufacturing firm operating in a mature industry, Tenderledge restruc-
                            tured Arguston’s operations and acquired some of Arguston’s direct competitors
                            to increase its economies of scale. Additionally, it acquired one of Arguston’s
                            smaller, strategic suppliers to create a strategically resilient and efficient entity. To
                            realize the efficiencies from streamlining production, operations, distributions,
                            and administration, Tenderledge is now considering exiting from this investment.
                                Trade sale may be an alternative Tenderledge considers, particularly because
                            there still are some competitors that may benefit from a strategic alliance with
                            a more cost-efficient peer. Tenderledge has turned to BridgeRock LLC, another
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Private Equity Investment Characteristics                                                   75


   private equity firm, which owns one of Arguston’s main competitors, Tetrawolf
   Inc., about merging the two companies before exiting from the investment by
   listing the companies on the market.


Public Listing
Public listing on an exchange can take place either as an initial public offering (IPO),
a direct listing, or a special acquisition company (SPAC). IPOs are the most common
means of raising capital in public equity markets using financial intermediaries to
underwrite the offering. When a private equity firm or company founder takes a
company public, the portfolio company sells its shares, including some or all of those
held by the private equity firm, to public investors.
    There are several benefits of an IPO as an exit strategy. An IPO may potentially
realize the highest price for the company, may increase the visibility of the company,
and would continue to provide an upside for the private equity company because it
retains a share in the new public entity. Moreover, the success of an IPO builds on
management support and approval, and it is likely that management will be retained,
which provides job security.
    There are several disadvantages with an IPO and public listing. Apart from the
high transaction fees to investment banks and lawyers, the time to complete the
transaction may be long, and it requires onerous disclosure. The public equity mar-
ket introduces stock market volatility, and the potential lockup period (mandating
the private equity firm to retain an equity position for a specified period post-IPO)
may limit a quick realization of value. Moreover, not all companies are suitable for
an IPO; smaller companies and those operating in out-of-favor industries, ones with
unclear strategic priorities and unstable financial position, or those that have limited
operating histories may not be ideal candidates for an IPO. A less commonly used
approach to exit from a private equity position is direct listing, where the equity of
the entity is floated on the public markets directly, without underwriters, reducing
the complexity and cost of the transaction.
    A special purpose acquisition company (SPAC) is a technique also used for a
public exit. Such a “blank check” company exists solely for the purpose of acquiring
an unspecified private company within a predetermined period; otherwise, it must
return capital to investors. Companies suitable for an IPO would be appropriate SPAC
candidates, but the two strategies have different valuation methods: here a single
counterparty sets SPAC terms, which reduces the uncertainty around the valuation.
    There are several advantages of an SPAC exit; these transactions provide an
extended time for public disclosure on company prospects to build investor interest,
flexibility of transaction structure to best suit the company’s context, and association
with potentially high-profile and seasoned sponsors and their extensive investor net-
work. Moreover, the valuation of the entity is fixed in advance and does not change,
which reduces both the volatility and the uncertainty of share pricing. Finally, SPACs
are allowed to provide more forward formal guidance on a company’s prospects than
is allowed under an IPO.
    There are some noteworthy shortcomings of using SPACs for market access and
exit. First, SPAC transactions increase the cost of capital because the various capital
instruments, such as warrants, have dilutive effects. Second, there is a valuation spread
between the value of the SPAC equity and the equity purchased by the SPAC. This
can be further complicated by possible dilution effects: The shares and warrants of
a SPAC can be issued and then traded separately. Third, there may also be specific
deal risk associated with the successful execution of the definite purchase and merger
agreement. Fourth, regulatory authorities, such as the US SEC, are reconsidering the
classification of SPACs under long established rules that could impose more stringent
standards on their operations. Finally, there may be significant trading in the SPAC
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
76   Learning Module 3                                         Investments in Private Capital: Equity and Debt


                         equity in the months after the purchase transaction is announced that can lead to
                         stockholder overhang, the downward pressure on the share price as large blocks of
                         shares are being sold on the open market.

                          EXAMPLE 3

                            Tenderledge and BridgeRock—SPAC Transaction
                            After Tenderledge Opportunity Fund LLC and BridgeRock merged their two
                            companies Arguston Inc. and Tetrawolf Inc., they continued to operate the
                            merged company, Aurora Inc., each holding a 50% share in the merged entity.
                            As both private equity firms are considering exiting from the investment at the
                            same time, they were evaluating various exit alternatives.
                                For private equity, having an exit strategy is critical. Tenderledge and
                            BridgeRock are evaluating various alternatives. Although IPOs and direct listings
                            are popular exit strategies, SPACs have the ability to raise capital as companies
                            such as Aurora enter the public market. Given the future uncertainty about
                            valuations, the private equity firms chose to go the SPAC route and enter into
                            a merger with a SPAC to bring Aurora to market a few months faster and at a
                            higher price than the companies would have realized had they chosen an IPO
                            or a direct listing.




                            Exhibit 3: Pros and Cons of Common Private Equity Exit Strategies

                         Strategy     Advantage                              Disadvantage

                         Trade Sale   1. Immediate cash exit                 1. Potential management opposition
                                      2. Higher price from                   2. Limited set of buyers
                                      synergy-seeking strategic buyers       3. Reduced financial appeal to employees
                                      3. Fast and simple execution           due to forgone monetization of ownership
                                      4. Streamlined process on              stakes/options
                                      transaction cost, disclosure, and
                                      confidentiality from dealing with
                                      only one party
                         IPO          1. Highest potential share price       1. High transaction costs
                                      2. Likeliest management approval       2. Long lead time
                                      3. Notoriety to private equity         3. Stock market volatility creating value
                                      sponsor’                               uncertainty
                                      4. Sharing in potential share price    4. Onerous disclosure
                                      appreciation from ongoing own-         5. Potential lockup period freezing capital
                                      ership stake                           committed to deal
                                                                             6. Suitable mainly for large and
                                                                             fast-growing companies
                         SPAC         1. Extended disclosure time and        1. Potential higher capital costs of dilution,
                                      ability to provide forward guid-       warrants, and fees
                                      ance to develop investor interest      2. Divergence between announced and
                                      2. Fixed valuation with lower          true equity value due to dilution
                                      share price volatility                 3. Deal and capital risk of potential
                                      3. Transaction structure flexibility   redemptions
                                      4. Involvement of high-profile,        4. Prolonged post-merger stockholder
                                      seasoned sponsors and their            overhang and churn
                                      investor networks
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Private Equity Investment Characteristics                                                    77


Other Exit Strategies
In addition to the previously discussed exit strategies, other exit strategies include
recapitalization, secondary sale, and write-off/liquidation.
    ■   Recapitalization. Recapitalization via private equity describes the steps a
        firm takes to increase or introduce leverage to its portfolio company and
        pay itself a dividend out of the new capital structure. A recapitalization is
        not a true exit strategy, because the private equity firm typically maintains
        control; however, it does allow the private equity investor to extract money
        from the company to pay its investors and improve its internal rate of return
        (IRR).
    ■   Secondary sale. This approach represents a sale of the company to another
        private equity firm or group of financial buyers. With the considerable
        amount of funds raised by global PE, there has been an increase in the pro-
        portion of secondary sale exits.
    ■   Write-off/liquidation. A write-off occurs when a transaction has not gone
        well, and the investment is likely to lose value. The private equity firm then
        revises the value of its investment downward or liquidates the portfolio
        company before moving on to other projects.
    The exit strategies we have discussed may be pursued individually or in combination
with others or may be used for a partial exit strategy, such as divesting a self-contained
product or business line. For example, private equity funds may sell a portion of a
portfolio company to a competitor via a trade sale and then complete a secondary
sale to another private equity firm for the remaining portion. Company shares may
also be distributed directly to the investors (LPs) of the private equity fund, although
such a move is unusual.


Risk–Return from Private Equity Investments
Private equity investors expect ownership capital returns—cash flows from dividends
and proceeds from exit—subject to underlying market conditions of the industry.
However, private equity investments have distinct entry and exit points between
which managers exercise greater direct control and apply specialized knowledge to
add value over a specific life cycle phase. While both involve investment selection
(stock selection using filings and financial statement analysis for public companies,
target selection for private equity), vintage year is important for private equity for
comparative purposes.
     The higher-return opportunities that private equity funds may provide relative to
traditional investments are due to their ability to invest in private companies, their
influence on portfolio companies’ management and operations, and their use of lever-
age. Investing in private equity, including venture capital, is riskier than investing in
common stocks and requires a higher return for accepting its higher risk, including
illiquidity and leverage risks.
     Published private equity indexes may be an unreliable measure of performance.
Measuring historical private equity performance is challenging; as with hedge
funds, which will be discussed later, private equity return indexes typically rely on
self-reporting and are subject to survivorship, backfill, and other biases. This typically
leads to an overstatement of returns. Moreover, prior to the global financial crisis of
2008–2009, in the absence of a liquidity event, private equity firms did not necessarily
mark their investments to market. Failure to mark to market combined with the lag
to mark investments due to inherent illiquidity will understate measures of volatility
and correlations with other investments. Thus, data adjustments are required to more
reliably measure the benefits of private equity investing. As a result, many investors
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
78   Learning Module 3                                         Investments in Private Capital: Equity and Debt


                         expect companies to be marked on a quarterly or annual basis, preferably by an inde-
                         pendent party. Investors should require a higher return for accepting a higher risk,
                         including illiquidity and leverage risks.

                          QUESTION SET


                            1. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks:
                               ________________ is the broad term for funding provided to companies that
                               is not sourced from the public markets, with its two primary sub-categories
                               being _________________ and ______________.
                               Solution:
                               Private capital is the broad term for funding provided to companies that is
                               not sourced from the public markets, with its two primary sub-categories
                               being private equity and private debt.

                            2. Identify the following statement as true or false: Both public and private eq-
                               uity represent direct ownership and control of the corporation. Additionally,
                               all owners have a direct and proportional claim to residual cash flow rights
                               in the form of dividends.
                               Solution:
                               True. These are two of the similarities shared by public and private equity.

                            3. Describe a funding situation to which a PIPE transaction is well suited.
                               Solution:
                               A PIPE (private investment in public equity) transaction is a private offering
                               to select investors with fewer disclosures and lower transaction costs that
                               allows the issuer to raise capital more quickly and cost effectively than other
                               means that may be more regulated, expensive, and lengthy. These transac-
                               tions are common in work-out or rescue situations where there is a material
                               difference in the market price and valuations.

                            4. Match each form of private capital investment with the combination of cor-
                               porate life cycle characteristics most appropriate for it.
                                                                      ​




                             Investment Form               Corporate Life Cycle Characteristics

                             1. Private Equity             i. Negative cash flow, high business risk
                             2. Venture Capital            ii. Increasing cash flow, high business risk
                             3. Both Private Equity and    iii. Declining cash flow, increasing business risk
                             Venture Capital
                                                                      ​




                               Solution:
                                                                      ​




                             Investment Form               Corporate Life Cycle Characteristics

                             1. Private Equity             iii. Declining cash flow, increasing business risk
                             2. Venture Capital            i. Negative cash flow, high business risk
                             3. Both Private Equity and    ii. Increasing cash flow, high business risk
                             Venture Capital
                                                                      ​




                               As shown in Exhibit 1, the “iii” combination of characteristics is typical of
                               the decline stage, when private equity would have the best fit. The “i” combi-
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Private Debt Investment Characteristics                                                          79


      nation of characteristics is typical of the start-up stage of the corporate life
      cycle, when venture capital is most appropriate. Finally, the “ii” combina-
      tion is typical of the growth stage, when the opportunities for the forms of
      investment overlap and either type would be suitable.




PRIVATE DEBT INVESTMENT CHARACTERISTICS
                                                                                             3
              explain features of private debt and its investment characteristics

Private debt primarily refers to the various forms of debt provided by investors directly
to private entities. In the past decade, the expansion of the private debt market has been
largely driven by private lending funds filling the gap between borrowing demand and
reduced lending supply from traditional lenders in the face of tightened regulations
following the 2008 financial crisis.
    We can organize the primary methods of private debt investing into four categories:
direct lending, mezzanine loans, venture debt, and distressed debt. The broad array
of debt strategies offers not only diversification benefits but also exposure to other
investment spheres, such as real estate and infrastructure.


Private Debt Categories
Analogous to private equity investment, an investor wanting to include private debt in
a portfolio has various alternatives along a comparable direct versus indirect distinc-
tion. In direct private debt investment, the investor makes a loan directly to a specific
operating company. In the indirect approach, the investor takes an intermediated
path, purchasing an interest in a fund that pools contributions typically on behalf
of multiple participants to buy into the debt from a set of operating companies. For
both approaches, in exchange for the debt, the investors receive interest payments
and the return of principal after a designated term. The debt is typically secured and
has various protections/covenants in place. Exhibit 4 depicts the role of private debt
in the corporate life cycle.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
80   Learning Module 3                                         Investments in Private Capital: Equity and Debt



                            Exhibit 4: Private Debt and Corporate Life Cycle
                                                          Venture debt                                   Public and private debt
                                                 Privately held convertible debt         Direct lending, mezzanine financing, leveraged lending

                             Life cycle stage     Seed              Start-up            Growth               Maturity               Decline

                               Revenues           None            Low to none          Increasing      Positive, predictable       Declining

                               Cash flow        Negative            Negative           Increasing      Positive, predictable       Declining

                              Business risk     Very high             High                High                 Low                 Increasing


                                                         Venture capital opportunity                  Private equity opportunity

                                                                                   Privately held company

                                                                                                     IPO

                                                                                                              Publicly traded

                                                                                                                 Buy-out, taking private, LBO




                         Venture debt is private debt funding that provides venture capital backing to start-up or
                         early-stage companies that may be generating little or negative cash flow. Entrepreneurs
                         may seek venture debt, often in the form of a line of credit or term loan, to obtain
                         additional financing without further diluting shareholder ownership. Venture debt
                         can complement existing equity financing, allowing current shareholders to maintain
                         ownership and control for a longer period. Similar to mezzanine debt, venture debt
                         may carry additional features that compensate the investor/lender for the increased
                         risk of default or for the start-up and early-stage companies that lack substantial assets
                         for debt collateral. One such feature could grant the lender rights to purchase equity
                         in the borrowing company under certain circumstances.
                             Private debt investors get involved in direct lending by providing capital directly
                         to borrowers and subsequently receiving interest, the original principal, and possibly
                         other payments in exchange for their investment. As with typical bank loans, pay-
                         ments are usually received on a fixed schedule. The debt itself typically is senior and
                         secured and has covenants in place to protect the lender/investor. It is provided by a
                         small number of investors to private and sometimes public entities and differs from
                         traditional debt instruments, such as bonds, which can be issued to many participants
                         and be publicly traded.
                             Direct lending primarily involves private debt firms (or private equity firms with
                         private debt arms) establishing funds with money raised from investors desiring
                         higher-yielding debt. Fund managers will then seek financing opportunities, such as
                         providing a loan to a mid-market corporation or extending debt to another private
                         equity fund that is seeking funds for acquisitions. In general, private debt funds provide
                         debt, at higher interest rates, to entities needing capital but lacking good alternatives
                         to traditional bank lenders, which themselves may be uninterested or unable to trans-
                         act with these borrowers. As in private equity, private debt fund managers conduct
                         thorough due diligence before investing.
                             In direct lending, many firms may also provide debt in the form of a leveraged
                         loan, a loan that is itself levered. Private debt firms that invest in leveraged loans first
                         borrow money to finance the debt and then extend it to another borrower. By using
                         leverage, a private debt firm can enhance the return on its loan portfolio.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Private Debt Investment Characteristics                                                   81


EXAMPLE 4

  Peterburgh Real Estate Fund, LLC—Syndicated Leveraged
  Mortgages
  The Peterburgh Real Estate Fund, LLC, has acquired a portfolio consisting of
  six commercial properties for a total of GBP100 million. From its investors, the
  fund secured GBP30 million in equity financing, and it turned to BridgeRock
  Credit Opportunities LLP, a private debt fund that underwrites commercial
  mortgages before syndicating them.
      In this specific transaction, properties valued at GBP100 million serve as col-
  lateral for a total of GBP75 million mortgages, giving an aggregate loan to value
  (LTV) of 0.75, which provides GBP25 million excess collateral to BridgeRock.
  The terms of the mortgage are MRR + 150 bps, with a maturity of 15 years,
  GBP5 million in annual amortization, and all mortgages being secured by the
  first lien on the property. The lender, BridgeRock, then sells or syndicates the
  mortgages to other banks or institutional investors. The LTV plays a significant
  role in both legs of this transaction. For Peterburgh to be able to borrow and for
  BridgeRock to be able syndicate the loans, the aggregate LTV ratio cannot be
  breached, and any deviation from the LTV on an individual property level needs
  to be cured. As Peterburgh amortizes the loan, the outstanding principal of the
  mortgages decline, which increases the LTV value. However, if the value of the
  real estate were to drop, then Peterburgh will be required to raise additional
  collateral to maintain the LTV.

    In private debt, mezzanine debt refers to private credit subordinated to senior
secured debt but senior to equity in the borrower’s capital structure. Mezzanine debt
is a pool of additional capital available to borrowers beyond senior secured debt,
often used to finance LBOs, recapitalizations, corporate acquisitions, and similar
transactions. Because of its typically junior ranking and its usually unsecured status,
mezzanine debt is riskier than senior secured debt. To compensate investors for this
heightened risk, investors commonly demand higher interest rates and may require
options for equity participation. Mezzanine debt often comes with additional features,
such as warrants or conversion rights. These provide equity participation to lenders/
investors, conveying the option to convert their debt into equity or purchasing the
equity of the underlying borrower under certain circumstances.
    Involvement in distressed debt typically entails buying the debt of mature com-
panies in financial difficulty. These companies may be in bankruptcy, have defaulted
on debt, or seem likely to default on debt. Some investors identify companies with a
temporary cash flow problem but a good business plan to help the company survive
and ultimately flourish. These investors buy the company’s debt expecting both the
company and its debt to increase in value. Turnaround investors buy debt with an
aim to be more active in distressed company management and direction, seeking to
restructure and revive the company. Overall, investors concentrating on distressed
debt need to develop specialized knowledge related to assessing the likelihood of
default and the possible recovery rates because distressed debt is priced to the
expected recovery rate, but occasionally recovery rates mistake the underlying risk of
the exposures and have long time horizons. Bankruptcy procedures can be lengthy,
complex, and capital intensive. Similarly, distressed debt investors need to understand
how to restructure companies and restructure debt. Several distressed debt funds
focus on debtor-in-possession (DIP) financing, which provides operating funds for
firms already in bankruptcy.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
82   Learning Module 3                                         Investments in Private Capital: Equity and Debt


                          HERTZ AND DIP FINANCING

                            Hertz entered Chapter 11 reorganization in May 2020 after filing for bank-
                            ruptcy due to COVID-19’s near total shutdown of the global travel industry. In
                            October 2020, it negotiated USD1.65 billion in operating funds secured through
                            debtor-in-possession financing. That committed Hertz to pay creditors up to
                            a market reference rate of (MRR) + 725 bps, permitting drawdowns from the
                            facility in individual tranches of at least USD250 million. Up to USD1 billion
                            was allowed for vehicle acquisition, and as much as USD800 million was allowed
                            to fund working capital and general corporate needs.
                                The DIP financing was projected to provide Hertz with liquidity to support its
                            continued operations throughout 2021, when the loan matured. Private capital
                            firms Apollo Global Management, Diameter Capital Partners, and Silver Point
                            Capital provided this funding. DIP financing is often a signal that lenders are
                            confident in the company’s ability to reorganize and pay the debt back in time.

                              Another type of debt that could be directly extended to borrowers is unitranche
                         debt. Unitranche debt consists of a hybrid or blended loan structure combining
                         different tranches of secured and unsecured debt into a single loan with a single,
                         blended interest rate. Since unitranche debt is a blend of secured and unsecured debt,
                         its interest rate will generally fall in between the interest rates often demanded on
                         secured and unsecured debt. The unitranche loan will usually be structured between
                         senior and subordinated debt in priority ranking.
                              Private debt firms may also provide specialty loans, extended to niche borrowers
                         in specific situations. For example, in litigation finance, a specialist funding company
                         provides debt to clients, usually plaintiffs in litigation, for their legal fees and expenses
                         in exchange for a share of judgements.


                         Risk–Return of Private Debt
                         Private debt investments may provide higher-yielding opportunities to fixed-income
                         investors seeking increased returns relative to traditional bonds. Private debt funds may
                         generate higher returns by taking opportunistic positions based on market inefficien-
                         cies. Private lending funds filled the financing gap left by traditional lenders following
                         the 2008 financial crisis. Investors in private debt could realize higher returns from
                         the illiquidity premium, which is the excess return investors require to compensate
                         for lack of liquidity. Investors also benefited from increased portfolio diversification
                         by owning these securities.
                             The interest rate of private debt is often expressed relative to a reference rate—for
                         example, the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) + 375 bps. As a result, the
                         coupon varies in line with changes to the reference rate brought about by changes to
                         the interest rate environment.
                             Differences between public and private debt include the distinct entry and exit
                         points with lenders, which offer borrowers greater flexibility in arranging financing.
                         Specialized knowledge for private debt financing is needed in order to add value for
                         the investor. First, the financing and return on debt depends on the specific period
                         of a company’s phase of life cycle. Earlier debt financing typically carries higher risks
                         and provides higher returns. Second, the structure of the debt is also of importance;
                         for instance, CLOs (collateralized loan obligations) with the market reference rate,
                         or MRR, as the base rate require specialized knowledge. Finally, the investor needs
                         to have special knowledge about underlying assets, particularly for secured lending,
                         such as real estate.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Private Debt Investment Characteristics                                                    83


    The potential for higher returns is connected to higher levels of risk. Private debt
investments vary in risk and return, with senior private debt providing a steadier yield
and moderate risk and mezzanine private debt carrying higher growth potential, equity
upside, and higher risk than senior private debt. Overall, investing in private debt is
riskier than investing in traditional bonds. Investors should be aware of these risks,
including illiquidity and heightened default risk when loans are extended to riskier
entities or borrowers in riskier situations. Modeling private equity or debt returns is
not straightforward, due to a lack of good-quality data and artificially smooth returns.

QUESTION SET


  1. Identify two categories of private debt that would typically be relied
     on in the growth stage or a later stage of the corporate life cycle.
     Solution:
     As shown in Exhibit 4, three private debt categories are featured in the later
     stages of the corporate life cycle:

      1. Direct lending
      2. Mezzanine financing
      3. Leveraged lending

  2. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks: Similar to mezzanine
     debt, ________________ may carry additional features that compensate the
     investor/lender for ___________________________ or for the start-up and
     early-stage companies that _________________________.
     Solution:
     Similar to mezzanine debt, venture debt may carry additional features that
     compensate the investor/lender for the increased risk of default or for the
     start-up and early-stage companies that lack substantial assets for debt
     collateral.

  3. Describe the borrowing cost of unitranche debt.
     Solution:
     Unitranche debt consists of a hybrid or blended loan structure combining
     different tranches of secured and unsecured debt into a single loan with a
     single, blended interest rate. Since unitranche debt is a blend of secured and
     unsecured debt, its interest rate will generally fall in between the interest
     rates often demanded on secured and unsecured debt.

  4. Identify the following statement as true or false: Modeling private debt
     returns is fairly straightforward because they are a function of a benchmark
     public debt return.
     Solution:
     False. While private debt and public debt share a reference point in be-
     ing marked up from a benchmark return, modeling private equity or debt
     returns is not straightforward, due to a lack of good-quality data, more secu-
     rity-specific risk between assets, and artificially smooth returns.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
84   Learning Module 3                                         Investments in Private Capital: Equity and Debt




             4           DIVERSIFICATION BENEFITS OF PRIVATE CAPITAL

                                       describe the diversification benefits that private capital can provide

                         Since the performance of private debt and private equity greatly depend on the specific
                         phase of a company’s life cycle, performance, and risk, comparison of public debt and
                         equity may not be appropriate. First, investing in a start-up carries greater risk than
                         investing in a well-established firm. Second, investing in a company in a declining or
                         disintermediated industry is unlikely to offer positive return over longer time hori-
                         zons. Moreover, performance risk of a continuous investment in public equity and
                         debt can easily be hedged away.
                             The vintage year is important for comparing private equity and VC investments
                         with other funds in the same year. Each private equity fund carries a vintage year,
                         typically defined as the year in which the fund makes its first investment. Typically, a
                         private equity fund operates over a 10- to 12-year period, which is often segmented
                         into an initial investment period and a subsequent harvesting period. The investment
                         period usually is the first five years during which the capital is sourced from the limited
                         partners and invested in various companies. The harvesting period is the remaining
                         years of the fund, when the fund looks to exit its existing investments and to return
                         capital to limited partners.
                             Because of changing business and valuation environments, funds of a certain
                         vintage have the advantage of starting in a low-valuation, low-risk appetite, economic
                         recovery phase and benefit from riding the wave of an economic recovery. Other
                         vintages may be less fortunate and invest the bulk of their capital in a high-valuation
                         environment preceding a market crash or a period of prolonged economic contraction.
                         That is why investors are encouraged to pursue vintage diversification by investing in
                         multiple vintage years.
                             The performance realized by the fund is greatly determined by the vintage year and
                         the phase of the business cycle in which the vintage year occurred, as Exhibit 5 shows.
                         Funds seeded during the expanding phase of the business cycle tend to earn excess
                         returns if they fund early-stage companies. Funds seeded during the contracting phase
                         of the business cycle tend to earn excess returns if they fund distressed companies.
                       © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Diversification Benefits of Private Capital                                                                                                85


 Exhibit 5: US Private Equity Index Vintage Year Returns, Net Fund-Level
 Performance

                                                      2020 Return
   50%

   45%

   40%

   35%

   30%

   25%

   20%

   15%

   10%

    5%

    0%
         VY 2007    VY 2011      VY 2012    VY 2013      VY 2014     VY 2015    VY 2016    VY 2017   VY 2018

Vintage Year                                      2007             2011        2012       2013       2014      2015    2016    2017    2018
2020 Return                                       10.3%            14.7%       24.8%      29.6%      29.0%     33.9%   40.4%   29.7%   43.5%

   Source: Cambridge Associates, data as of December 31, 2020. https://​www​.cambridgeassociates​
   .com/​benchmarks/​us​-pe​-vc​-benchmark​-commentary​-calendar​-year​-2020/​

    Investments in private capital vary in terms of risk and return across the corporate
capital structure hierarchy. Typically, private equity, as the riskiest alternative, offers
the highest returns, with private debt returns declining on a continuum down to the
safest, most secured form of debt—infrastructure debt. Exhibit 6 outlines various
private equity and private debt categories by their risk and return levels (mirroring
the risk–return pathway for traditional equity and debt investing, note the trade-off
as investors select between junior and senior debt and between equity and debt).



  Exhibit 6: Private Capital Risk and Return Levels by Category
     Return

                                                                                        Private Equity
                                                                                       Co-Investments

                                                              Debt Mezzanine


                                           Unitranche Debt


                              Senior Direct Lending


                   Senior Real Estate Debt


           Infrastructure Debt


                                                      Risk
   Source: Based on a graph from Leon Sinclair, “The Rise of Private Debt,” IHS Markit (7 August 2017).
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
86   Learning Module 3                                         Investments in Private Capital: Equity and Debt


                         Investments in private capital funds can add a moderate diversification benefit to a
                         portfolio of publicly traded stocks and bonds. Correlations with public market indexes
                         vary from 0.63 to 0.83, as shown in Exhibit 7. And if investors identify skillful fund
                         managers, benefits from excess returns given the additional leverage, market, and
                         liquidity risks are possible.



                            Exhibit 7: Private Capital’s Average Correlations with Public Market
                            Indexes, March 2008–June 2021

                                                                   S&P 500 Total         Russell 2000         MSCI World
                                                                      Return             Total Return         Total Return

                         Preqin, Private Equity                          0.80                 0.76                 0.81
                         Preqin, Venture All Stage                       0.65                 0.67                 0.63
                         Preqin, Buyout                                  0.82                 0.76                 0.83
                         Preqin, Private Debt                            0.82                 0.77                 0.86

                         Source: Annualized quarterly returns of Private Capital Quarterly Index rebased to 31 December 2007,
                         provided by Preqin.



                          QUESTION SET


                            1. State a private debt and equity investment factor that can make
                               performance/risk comparisons with public debt and equity inappropriate.
                               Solution:
                               There are several private debt and equity investment factors that can invali-
                               date such comparisons:

                                 ■   Start-up investments carry greater risks than those of established
                                     firms.
                                 ■   Investments in declining industries are unlikely to sustain gains over
                                     the long term.
                                 ■   Ongoing performance risk in private investments can’t be easily
                                     hedged.


                            2. Describe the life cycle segments of a private equity fund.
                               Solution:
                               The year in which a private equity fund makes its first investments is called
                               its vintage year. Typically, operations span a 10- to 12-year period, which is
                               often segmented into an initial investment period and a subsequent harvest-
                               ing period. The investment period usually is the first five years during which
                               the capital is sourced from the limited partners and invested in various com-
                               panies. The harvesting period is the remaining years of the fund, when the
                               fund looks to exit its existing investments and to return capital to limited
                               partners.
                       © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Diversification Benefits of Private Capital                                             87


  3. Identify the following statement as true or false:

     A private equity fund whose vintage dates to a high-valuation environment
     most likely starts with an advantage in having rich prices for its assets.
     Solution:
     False. Funds starting in a low-valuation, low-risk appetite, economic
     recovery phase benefit from riding the wave of an economic recovery and
     have an advantage over other vintages investing the bulk of their capital in
     a high-valuation environment preceding a market crash or a period of pro-
     longed economic contraction.

  4. Match the form of private capital investment with its most likely position on
     the risk/return continuum.
                                           ​




    Investment Form                 Risk/return combination

    1. Mezzanine Financing          i. Lowest risk and return
    2. Private Equity               ii. Intermediate risk and return
    3. Senior Direct Lending        iii. Highest risk and return
                                           ​




     Solution:
     Investing in private debt and equity mirrors the risk–return pathway for
     traditional equity and debt investing. As investors select between senior and
     junior debt and between equity and debt, the potential risks and returns
     increase. Therefore, the lowest risk and return come from senior direct lend-
     ing, and the highest risk and return are from private equity, while mezzanine
     financing falls in between the two.
                                           ​




    Investment Form                 Risk/return combination

    1. Mezzanine Financing          ii. Intermediate risk and return
    2. Private Equity               iii. Highest risk and return
    3. Senior Direct Lending        i. Lowest risk and return
                                           ​
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
88   Learning Module 3                                         Investments in Private Capital: Equity and Debt




                            PRACTICE PROBLEMS
                         1. Which of the following is most likely to participate in early-stage financing?
                             A. Founders

                             B. Angel investors

                             C. Strategic investors

                         2. Private equity funds are most likely to use:
                             A. leveraged buyouts.

                             B. option-based strategies.

                             C. merger arbitrage strategies.

                         3. A shared advantage of IPO and SPAC exit strategies for a private equity fund is
                            their:
                             A. fast and simple execution.

                             B. ability to win market attention.

                             C. transaction structure flexibility.

                         4. Which of the following combinations of financial characteristics most likely
                            would be associated with a venture debt transaction?
                             A. Positive revenues and cash flow

                             B. Declining revenues and cash flow

                             C. Low revenues and negative cash flow

                         5. In contrast to direct lending and distressed debt, mezzanine debt most likely
                            requires higher interest rates for its investors due to its:
                             A. reliance on leverage.

                             B. overall ranking and status in company debt structure.

                             C. need for management involvement over an extended time.

                         6. A feature that private debt and public debt share in the setting of their investment
                            returns is their:
                             A. relationship to benchmark interest rates.

                             B. need for specialized investment knowledge.

                             C. opportunity for illiquidity premiums in market crises.

                         7. The most likely effect on a portfolio’s diversification when exposure to direct
                            lending commences is that it:
                             A. decreases.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Practice Problems                                                                          89


   B. remains the same.

   C. increases.

8. Private equity funds whose vintage year occurs in the expanding phase of the
   business cycle tend to earn excess returns by investing in companies that are:
   A. mature.

   B. distressed.

   C. early stage.

9. The private capital category most likely to offer the highest diversification benefit
   for portfolios holding public stock and bonds is:
   A. private debt.

   B. private equity.

   C. venture capital.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
90   Learning Module 3                                         Investments in Private Capital: Equity and Debt




                            SOLUTIONS
                         1. C is correct. Strategic investors typically join in at early-stage to later-stage
                            financing. A is incorrect because founders are typically part of the investor group
                            at the earliest, pre-seed stage. B is incorrect because angel investors are typically
                            involved in the beginning stages, either pre-seed or seed.

                         2. A is correct. Many private equity transactions involve leveraged buyouts to
                            acquire public companies or established private companies. B and C are incorrect
                            because these are strategies implemented by other types of alternative investors,
                            such as hedge funds.

                         3. B is correct. IPOs can gain public attention for sponsors by high-profile business
                            launches, and SPACs often have high-profile, seasoned sponsors and their inves-
                            tor networks as participants. A is incorrect because this is an advantage of a trade
                            sale exit strategy. C is incorrect because it is a benefit specific to SPACs, with
                            IPOs having fairly rigid and defined features, such as onerous disclosure require-
                            ments and lock-up periods.

                         4. C is correct. These financial characteristics are typical of the start-up stage in
                            the corporate life cycle, when it is suitable to rely on venture debt. A is incorrect
                            because these are features of the maturity stage, when direct lending, mezzanine
                            financing, and leveraged lending are customary. B is incorrect because these are
                            features of the maturity stage, when direct lending, mezzanine financing, and
                            leveraged lending are customary.

                         5. B is correct. Because of its typically junior ranking and its usually unsecured sta-
                            tus, mezzanine debt is riskier than senior secured debt. To compensate investors
                            for this heightened risk, investors commonly demand higher interest rates. A
                            is incorrect because leverage is typically a feature of a form of direct lending in
                            which firms may also provide debt in the form of a leveraged loan, a loan that is
                            itself levered with borrowing costs figuring into returns. C is incorrect because
                            operational involvement over a possibly lengthy time with unpredictable risks
                            describes the role of turnaround investors involved with distressed debt.

                         6. A is correct. For both public debt and private debt, return on debt capital tends
                            to follow and change with the benchmark interest rate environment. B is incor-
                            rect because there is a need for specialized knowledge for private debt financing
                            to add value to the investor through consideration of such factors as the debt’s
                            life cycle timing, its place in the financial structure, and the quality of underlying
                            assets. C is incorrect because in market disruptions, such as the 2008 finan-
                            cial crisis, private debt exclusively benefited from an illiquidity premium when
                            private lending funds filled the financing gap left by traditional lenders because
                            traditional lenders were reluctant to underwrite public debt.

                         7. A is correct. While private capital can have overall positive contributions to
                            diversification, direct lending can involve a large capital commitment to a single
                            borrower, with increased concentration risk and reduced diversification. Inves-
                            tors attempt to protect against the risk of direct lending by having the debt itself
                            classified as senior and secured with protective covenants in place to benefit from
                            the associated higher interest rates while reducing non-diversifiable specific risk
                            associated with a single borrower.

                         8. C is correct. Fund performance is greatly determined by the vintage year and the
                            coinciding phase of the business cycle. Funds seeded during the expanding phase
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Solutions                                                                                91


   tend to earn excess returns investing in early-stage companies. Funds seeded
   during the contracting phase tend to do best with distressed companies. Results
   may be intermediate with mature, stable companies.

9. C is correct. Research on the correlations between portfolios holding these public
   assets shows that venture capital has the lowest correlations across all major mar-
   ket indexes. This relationship implies a higher diversification benefit for venture
   capital.
© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.




LEARNING MODULE


4
Real Estate and Infrastructure
 LEARNING OUTCOMES
  Mastery     The candidate should be able to:

              explain features and characteristics of real estate
              explain the investment characteristics of real estate investments
              explain features and characteristics of infrastructure
              explain the investment characteristics of infrastructure investments




INTRODUCTION
Broadly defined, real estate comprises land and buildings. Real estate investments
                                                                                            1
involve developed land, including commercial and industrial real estate and resi-
dential real estate. Real estate has some unique features, including heterogeneity (no
two properties are identical), long lives, and fixed geographical or physical location.
    Raw land and less developed land used in agriculture and forestry are categorized
as natural resource investments, while infrastructure involves land, buildings, and other
fixed assets developed by public entities or public–private partnerships for economic
use. Investments in real estate and infrastructure are included in many portfolios
because they tend to exhibit low correlations with traditional asset classes and provide
risk and return combinations across a broad spectrum. Here, as in other alternative
assets, investors need specialized knowledge in selecting, acquiring, managing, and
divesting these assets.

   LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW

       ■   Real estate includes two major sectors: residential and com-
           mercial. Residential real estate is the largest sector, totaling
           75% of the global market. Commercial real estate includes office build-
           ings, shopping centers, and warehouses.
       ■   Real estate investing has some unique features, including heterogene-
           ity (no two properties are identical), fragmentation, price discovery
           challenges, and costly and time-consuming transactions.
       ■   Real estate investments can be direct or indirect, in the public market
           (e.g., REITs) or private transactions, and in equity.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
94   Learning Module 4                                                          Real Estate and Infrastructure


                                ■   The return on real estate investments comes from income or asset
                                    appreciation or a combination of both. More than half of the returns
                                    commercial real estate investors earn are derived from income, and
                                    throughout an economic market cycle, real estate income is a more
                                    consistent source of return than capital appreciation.
                                ■   Investing in real estate can generate either lower-risk, bond-like cash
                                    flows from leases or higher-risk, equity-like speculative returns from
                                    realizing value from development projects or price appreciation.
                                ■   Real estate offers diversification benefits to portfolios. However, during
                                    certain market conditions, equity REIT correlations with market
                                    benchmarks increase, particularly during steep market downturns.
                                ■   Infrastructure consists of assets that are capital intensive and long
                                    lived and that are intended to provide essential services for public use.
                                ■   Infrastructure investments can take many forms, both direct and indi-
                                    rect. They can be broadly categorized as either economic (e.g., trans-
                                    portation, utility, and energy assets) or social (e.g., educational assets).
                                    They can also be categorized based on the underlying asset’s stage of
                                    development as greenfield, secondary stage, or brownfield. The green-
                                    field investment life cycle common among public–private partnerships
                                    is called the build-operate-transfer (BOT) life cycle.
                                ■   Most infrastructure assets are financed, owned, and operated by gov-
                                    ernments, and infrastructure is increasingly being financed privately
                                    through public–private partnerships by local, regional, and national
                                    governments. Investments in construction and development of new
                                    infrastructure are made with expectations to generate cash from either
                                    income or capital appreciation.
                                ■   Of the three stages of infrastructure investments, greenfield invest-
                                    ments offer the highest expected return and have the highest expected
                                    risk, and secondary stage investments offer the lowest expected return
                                    and have the lowest expected risk.
                                ■   Infrastructure investors primarily expect the assets to generate stable
                                    long-term cash flows that also adjust for economic growth and infla-
                                    tion and secondarily expect capital appreciation, depending on the
                                    type and timing of their investment.
                                ■   Infrastructure investments provide an income stream, increase port-
                                    folio diversification by adding an asset class with typically low cor-
                                    relation with other public investments, provide some protection for
                                    changes in GDP growth, and offer some protection against inflation.



                          LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT

                            These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
                            of understanding of this learning module.

                            1. The two categories of real property are:
                                A. residential and commercial.
                                B. privately held and publicly traded.
                       © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Introduction                                                                            95


      C. individual market and institutional market.
     Solution:
     The correct answer is A. The two categories of real property are residential
     and commercial.

  2. The preferred investment vehicles for public investors to own income-pro-
     ducing real estate are:
      A. real estate funds.
      B. mortgage-backed securities.
      C. real estate investment trusts.
     Solution:
     The correct answer is C. Real estate investment trusts (REITs) are the pre-
     ferred investment vehicles for owning income-producing real estate for both
     private and public investors.

  3. Which of the following entails the least risk?
      A. Value-add real estate
      B. Investment-grade commercial mortgage-backed securities
      C. Residential real estate with long-term leases and many lessors
     Solution:
     The correct answer is B. Of these three, investment-grade commercial
     mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) entail the least risk, and value-add real
     estate investments entail the most.

  4. Which of the following entails the most risk?
      A. Mezzanine debt
      B. Core-plus real estate strategies
      C. Redevelopment of an existing property
     Solution:
     The correct answer is A. Of these three, mezzanine debt entails the most
     risk, and core-plus strategies entail the least.

  5. The first stage of development of an infrastructure asset is typically called:
      A. bluesky.
      B. greenfield.
      C. early stage.
     Solution:
     The correct answer is B. The first stage of development of an infrastructure
     asset is typically called greenfield. Greenfield investing involves developing
     new assets and new infrastructure with the intention either to lease or sell
     the assets to the government after construction or to hold and operate the
     assets. Greenfield investors typically invest alongside strategic investors or
     developers that specialize in developing the underlying assets. The sub-
     sequent stages of development of infrastructure assets are typically called
     secondary stage and brownfield.

  6. Direct infrastructure investment involves assets that are:
      A. illiquid.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
96   Learning Module 4                                                          Real Estate and Infrastructure


                                B. securitized.
                                C. exchange traded.
                               Solution:
                               The correct answer is A. Like real estate, direct investment in existing in-
                               frastructure involves acquiring unique, illiquid assets with distinct location,
                               features, and uses. Investors concerned about liquidity and diversification
                               may invest indirectly using publicly traded infrastructure securities.

                            7. Which of the following types of infrastructure investments has the highest
                               expected return?
                                A. Greenfield
                                B. Brownfield
                                C. Secondary stage
                               Solution:
                               The correct answer is A. Greenfield investments offer the highest expected
                               return of the three. They also entail the highest expected risk. Secondary
                               stage offers the lowest expected return and the lowest expected risk.

                            8. Which of the following tends to make the largest allocations to the infra-
                               structure asset class?
                                A. Pension funds
                                B. Sovereign wealth funds
                                C. Life insurance companies
                               Solution:
                               The correct answer is B. Sovereign wealth funds tend to make the largest
                               allocations to the infrastructure asset class—around 5%–6% of total AUM,
                               according to Preqin.




             2           REAL ESTATE FEATURES

                                       explain features and characteristics of real estate

                         Both individuals and institutions invest in real property: either in residential or com-
                         mercial real estate. Residential real estate, or the housing market, consists of individual
                         single-family detached homes and multi-family attached units, which share at least one
                         wall with another unit, such as condominiums, cooperatives, townhouses, or terraced
                         housing. Commercial real estate includes primarily office buildings, retail shopping
                         centers, commercial and residential rental properties, and warehouses. In contrast to
                         the owner-occupied market, rental properties are leased to tenants.
                             Residential real estate is by far the largest market sector by value and size. Savills
                         World Research estimated in July 2018 that residential real estate accounted for more
                         than 75% of global real estate values. Although the average value of a home is less than
                         the average value of an office building, the aggregate space required to house people
                         is much larger than that needed to accommodate office use and retail shopping.
                       © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Real Estate Features                                                                          97



Real Estate Investments
Real estate investments exhibit general similarities to and differences from traditional
equity and debt classes. Real estate can be held privately or traded publicly through
real estate investment trusts (REITs). Equity investment involves direct or indirect
ownership with claims to residual cash flows from the property. Depending on the
property investment, these cash flows can be variable or fixed. Debt investment typ-
ically involves direct mortgage lending from financial intermediaries, part of which
then can be securitized and then traded through various types of mortgage-backed
securities (MBS). The main features of residential and commercial real estate are
shown in Exhibit 1.



  Exhibit 1: Main Features of Residential and Commercial Real Estate

                        Residential real estate           Commercial real estate

Typical property        Owner-occupied, single resi-      Residential properties owned for
                        dences; single-family residen-    lease or rental
                        tial property                     Office, retail, industrial, ware-
                                                          house, hospitality, and mixed-use
                                                          properties
Source of equity        Owners                            Privately held by owners
                                                          Publicly held through investors
Source of debt          Directly: Lenders (banks)         Directly: Lenders (banks) through
                        through residential mortgages     commercial mortgages
                        Indirectly: Investors in MBS      Indirectly: Investors in MBS that
                        that package residential          package commercial mortgages
                        mortgages
Source of return to     Enjoyment of the property         Income, or cash flow, generated
investors               Price, or capital, appreciation   by the property
                                                          Price, or capital, appreciation

Real estate is uniquely different from other asset classes in several ways:
    ■   The initial investment is typically large.
    ■   Real estate is unique and distinct because there aren’t two identical prop-
        erties; each piece of real estate is heterogeneous and is uniquely charac-
        terized in terms of location, age, tenant credit mix, lease term, and market
        demographics.
    ■   There are multiple types of real estate investment alternatives available:
        direct and indirect investment options spanning the spectrum from rela-
        tively liquid investments in stable, income-producing properties to illiquid
        investments over a long development life cycle across the purchase, con-
        struction/upgrade, occupancy, and sales phases.
    ■   Diversification across all different types of real estate investment alternatives
        may be difficult to attain.
    ■   Private market indexes replicating the performance of real estate are not
        directly investable.
   Additionally, the price discovery process in the private real estate markets is
opaque, for multiple reasons:
    ■   Historical prices may not reflect prevailing market conditions.
                         © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
98   Learning Module 4                                                          Real Estate and Infrastructure


                             ■   Transaction costs are typically high. Buying and selling real estate can be a
                                 time-consuming process, involving real estate professionals, banks, lawyers,
                                 and others needed to facilitate these transactions.
                             ■   Transaction activity may be limited in certain markets due to either supply
                                 or demand conditions.
                             Because of distinct and unique features—geographic location and potential uses—
                         real estate markets are typically fragmented, with the local demand and supply condi-
                         tions determining the value of the property. Consequently, the heterogeneity unique
                         to real estate demands specialized skills. Selecting, valuing, acquiring, managing, and
                         divesting a real estate portfolio is often more complicated than managing a portfolio
                         made up of listed corporate debt and equity.


                         Real Estate Investment Structures
                         Real estate investments take on a variety of public and private forms across equity
                         and debt capital alternatives, as summarized in Exhibit 2.



                            Exhibit 2: Selected Forms of Real Estate Investment
                                                           Debt                     Equity

                                                                                Direct ownership
                                                      Mortgage debt              Sole ownership
                                                                                 Joint ventures
                                        Private      Construction loans       Limited partnerships

                                                      Mezzanine debt          Indirect ownership
                                                                               Real estate funds
                                                                                 Private REITs

                                                     MBS/CMBS/CMOs          Publicly traded shares
                                                                                 Construction
                                                      Covered bonds                Operating
                                                                                 Development
                                        Public
                                                      Mortgage REITs              Public REITs

                                                      Mortgage ETFs         UCITS/Mutual funds/ETFs




                         Direct Real Estate Investment
                         Direct private investing involves purchasing a property and originating debt for one’s
                         own account. Ownership can be free and clear, whereby the property title is transferred
                         to the owner(s) unencumbered by any financing liens, such as from outstanding mort-
                         gages. Initial purchase expenses associated with direct ownership may include legal
                         expenses, survey costs, engineering/environmental studies, and valuation (appraisal)
                         fees. There are distinct advantages to owning real estate directly for property investors:
                             ■   Control. Only the owner can decide when to buy or sell, when and how
                                 much to spend on capital projects, whom to select as tenants based on
                                 credit quality preference and tenant mix, and what types of lease terms to
                       © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Real Estate Features                                                                         99


        offer. Owners generate cash flow returns from the use and enjoyment of
        the property, the receipt of lease payments, and the potential for capital
        appreciation.
    ■   Tax benefits. The owners can reduce their taxable income using non-cash
        property depreciation expenses and tax-deductible interest expenses.
    ■   Diversification. Historically, real estate has exhibited low correlation with
        other asset classes, and adding real estate to a portfolio has been demon-
        strated to increase portfolio diversification and reduce portfolio risk.
   There are also disadvantages to investing directly in property:
    ■   Complexity. The owners need to dedicate time to manage the property.
        Making the purchase itself is more complicated as well, with requirements
        including property selection, negotiating terms, performing due diligence,
        title search, contract review, and property inspection.
    ■   Need for specialized knowledge. The owners need to understand both general
        and local market characteristics, which requires local market knowledge.
    ■   Significant capital needs. The owners need to have access to a potentially
        significant amount of debt and equity capital because of the large initial
        capital outlay needed for real estate investments.
    ■   Concentration risk. Owners, particularly smaller investors, cannot create a
        well-diversified real estate portfolio through direct investment.
    ■   Lack of liquidity. It is typically difficult to quickly buy or sell direct invest-
        ments in real estate, and transaction costs are typically high.
    Real estate investors may choose to handle all aspects of investing in and operating
the property internally. However, commercial real estate investors often hire advisers
to identify investments, negotiate acquisition and lease terms, perform due diligence,
conduct real estate operations, and assist with the eventual disposal. Institutional
investors that hire advisers or managers to manage their direct real estate investment
can also use a separate account structure that allows the investor to control the timing
and value of acquisitions and dispositions.
    Owners can also borrow from mortgage lenders to fund the acquisition. Additional
debt closing costs are incurred when owners take out loans to fund their investments.

Indirect Real Estate Investment
Indirect investment in real estate pools assets from different investors to acquire one
or several properties; here the exposure is indirect through a variety of investment
vehicles. These can be public or private, such as limited partnerships, mutual funds,
equities, REITs, and exchange-traded funds (ETFs). Sometimes investors form joint
ventures with other investors to invest in real estate. Joint ventures are especially
common when one party can uniquely contribute something of value, such as land,
capital, development expertise, debt due diligence, or entrepreneurial talent.
    Tax-advantaged trusts that own, operate, and sometimes develop income-producing
real estate property are known as real estate investment trusts. Their structure is
shown in Exhibit 3. There are three main forms of REIT: equity REITs, which invest
in properties outright or through partnerships and joint ventures; mortgage REITs,
which underwrite loans to real estate (mortgages) or invest in MBS; and hybrid REITs,
which invest in both these types.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
100   Learning Module 4                                                          Real Estate and Infrastructure



                             Exhibit 3: Real Estate Investment Trust Structure

                                                            Investor              Investor
                                                          (Unitholder)          (Unitholder)


                                                            Investor              Investor
                                                          (Unitholder)          (Unitholder)



                                                                              Income
                                                                            Distribution
                                               Trustee                                          Management
                                               Services                                          Services
                                                                                                                 Investment
                                 Trustee                                 REIT                                      Manager
                                                Trustee                                         Management
                                                 Fees                                              Fees
                                                             Gross                Property
                                                            Property             Acquisition/
                                                            Income                  Sale



                                                                                                     Property
                                                                                                    Management
                                                           Property              Property              Fees
                                                                                                                       Property
                                                                                                                       Manager
                                                           Property              Property            Property
                                                                                                    Management
                                                                                                     Services




                          REITs are the preferred investment vehicles for owning income-producing real estate
                          for both private and public investors. The main appeal of the REIT structure is the
                          elimination of double corporate taxation. Corporations pay taxes on their income,
                          from which they make dividend distribution to their owners from after-tax earnings.
                          The shareholders, in turn, are taxed at their personal tax rate. REITs can avoid cor-
                          porate income taxation by distributing dividends equal to 90%–100% of taxable net
                          rental income.
                              The business strategy for equity REITs is simple: Maximize property occupancy
                          rates and rents while minimizing ongoing operating and maintenance expenses to
                          maximize cash income and dividends. REITs are a popular investment vehicle both in
                          the United States, where they originated, and in other countries. REITs and REIT-like
                          structures have similar legal and taxation structures and provide unique tax advantages
                          to investors and the corporate entity.
                              Equity REITs, like other public companies, must report earnings per share based
                          on net income as defined by generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) or
                          International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). Many report non-traditional
                          measures, such as net asset value or variations of gross cash flow, such as funds from
                          operations (FFO), which makes adjustments for depreciation, distributions, and pre-
                          ferred dividends, to better estimate future dividends, because non-cash depreciation
                          expenses can be high for asset-intensive businesses.
                              These publicly traded REITs address many of the disadvantages related to pri-
                          vate real estate investing. These REITs provide investors with greater transparency.
                          Additionally, a REIT investor only needs to buy or sell REIT shares instead of buying
                          or selling real estate directly. The REIT is not forced to sell the company’s underlying
                          real estate like open-end funds experiencing mass redemptions. Finally, REITs have
                          the know-how to manage the properties in order to align the interests of the REIT
                          with those of its investors. However, a disadvantage of REITs is their higher correlation
                          with the public equity markets when compared to private real estate.
                       © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Real Estate Features                                                                       101


EXAMPLE 1

   Luxury Dreams REIT
   Luxury Dreams Real Estate Investment Trust acquires high-quality, income-ori-
   ented, high-end real estate around the world and offers investment alternatives
   for investors looking for long-term, stable, predictable cash flows, price appre-
   ciation in the underlying properties from the inclusion of properties, and active
   management of the properties, at generally lower volatility because of its focus
   on high-end real estate.
       The REIT invests at least 75% of assets in high-end residential properties
   and up to 25% of assets in privately held, real estate-related securities, mortgage
   debt, and cash. The REIT is capped at USD5 billion. Because this REIT is not
   traded publicly, shares in the trust can be redeemed at the end of each month
   at a price equal to the prior month’s net asset value (NAV) per share in incre-
   ments of USD10,000. NAV per share is determined at the end of each month
   and is released to holders within 15 business days after the end of the month.
   Each shareholder is limited to transact 2% of the total NAV per month and 5%
   of NAV per quarter.

    REITs and other private real estate funds are structured as infinite-life, open-end
funds and allow investors to contribute or redeem capital throughout the life of the
fund in a fashion parallel to mutual fund structures. Open-end funds generally offer
exposure to well-leased, high-quality commercial and residential real estate in the best
markets, also called core real estate strategies. Investors expect core real estate to
deliver stable returns, primarily from income from the property.
    Investors seeking higher returns may also accept additional risks from develop-
ment, redevelopment, repositioning, and leasing. For such opportunistic investment
preferences, finite-life, closed-end funds are more commonly used. Investors may
focus on core-plus real estate strategies, value-add investments that require modest
redevelopment or upgrades to lease any vacant space together with possible alterna-
tive use of the underlying properties. To earn higher returns, investors may engage
in value-add real estate strategies, such as larger-scale redevelopment and repo-
sitioning of existing assets. The most opportunistic real estate strategies include
major redevelopment, repurposing of assets, taking on large vacancies, or speculating
on significant improvement in market conditions.
    Mortgage REITs and hybrid REITs invest in real estate debt, typically MBS (cov-
ered elsewhere in the curriculum. These debt REITs can be both private and publicly
traded funds.

QUESTION SET


   1. True or false: The distinct and unique features of real estate make
      managing a real estate portfolio less complex than managing a portfolio of
      listed corporate bonds.
      Solution:
      False. Selecting, valuing, acquiring, managing, and divesting a real estate
      portfolio is often more complicated than managing a portfolio made up
      of listed corporate debt. The heterogeneity unique to real estate demands
      specialized skills, and real estate markets are typically fragmented, with the
      local demand and supply conditions determining the value of the property.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
102   Learning Module 4                                                          Real Estate and Infrastructure


                             2. The largest sector of the real estate market is:
                                 A. residential real estate.
                                 B. real estate investment trusts.
                                 C. publicly traded mortgage-backed securities.
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is A. Residential real estate is by far the largest market
                                sector by value and size. Savills World Research estimated in July 2018 that
                                residential real estate accounted for more than 75% of global real estate
                                values.

                             3. Describe the business strategy for equity REITs.
                                Solution:
                                The business strategy for equity REITs is to maximize property occupan-
                                cy rates and rents while minimizing ongoing operating and maintenance
                                expenses to maximize cash income and dividends.

                             4. When a property title that is transferred to a new owner is unencumbered
                                by any financing liens, such as from outstanding mortgages, the new owner-
                                ship is considered:
                                 A. privately held.
                                 B. free and clear.
                                 C. direct equity ownership.
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is B. “Free and clear” refers to the lack of any financing
                                liens on a purchased property. If a direct private investor purchases a prop-
                                erty and receives a title that is unencumbered by any financing liens, that
                                ownership is considered free and clear.




              3           REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT CHARACTERISTICS

                                        explain the investment characteristics of real estate investments

                          Investments in real estate provide competitive long-term total returns from income
                          generation combined with potential price appreciation. Many commercial real estate
                          companies offer multiple-year leases with fixed rents; hence, the income earned from
                          these leases is typically both predictable and stable. Moreover, real estate tends to
                          provide inflation protection because the lease payments are regularly adjusted, which
                          allows for a clear valuation and pricing of the property. Finally, real estate historically
                          has low correlations with other asset classes, and adding real estate to an investment
                          portfolio provides diversification benefits at relatively lower levels of risk. There are
                          a variety of indexes globally designed to measure total and component real estate
                          returns for listed securities and non-listed investment vehicles.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Real Estate Investment Characteristics                                                                                                                       103



Source of Returns
The return on real estate investments comes from income or asset appreciation or a
combination of both. Income-producing real estate generates income primarily from
the collection of rental or lease payments, including lease renewals. Expenses include
direct and indirect management expenses, such as maintenance and improvement
costs. Income-producing real estate investment is mostly low-risk direct investment
that depends on the timely receipt of lease payments. Investors relying on capital
appreciation typically expect that their longer-term property development projects
are successful and the exit price will exceed the aggregate investments and any cash
flow that they can generate in the meantime.
    The risk and return spectrum for real estate investments, depicted in Exhibit 4,
includes strategies across both debt and equity investment. Investing in real estate can
generate either lower-risk, bond-like cash flows from leases or higher-risk, equity-like
speculative returns from realizing value from development projects or price appre-
ciation. Moreover, most real estate strategies are financed by a combination of debt
and equity, with the proportion depending on the type of real estate.



  Exhibit 4: Real Estate Risk–Return Spectrum
                                            The Real Estate Risk-Return Spectrum

                High   Return




                                                                                                                 Opportunistic
                                                                                                                 – Development
                                                                                                                 – Mezzanine Debt
                                                                                                                 – Unrated CMBS
                                                                                                                                           Cash-Flow
   Primarily                                                                                                     – Distressed Situations
                                                                                                                                           Growth
   Private                                                                              Value-add                                          Investment
   Strategies                                                                           – Leasing Vacant Space
                                                                                                                                           Strategies
                                                                                        – Redevelopment and Property Repositioning
                                                                        Core-Plus – Below Investment Grade CMBS
                                                                        – Minimal Refurbishment
                                                                        – Tenant Repositioning
                                                          Core          – Stabilizing Cash Flow
                                                          – Stable Income Producing Properties
                                                          – Diversified Public REIT Investing
   Available                                              – Credit Sale/Leaseback                                                          Bond-Like
   Through                            Senior Debt
   Public
                 Low                  – First Mortgages
                                                                                                                                           Return
                                                                                                                                           Characteristics
   Vehicles                           – Investment Grade CMBS

                                                                                                                                 Risk

                                Low                                                                                              High




The low-risk/low-return part of the spectrum, starting in the lower left section of
the exhibit, is made up by relatively low-risk, senior debt, such as first mortgages
and investment-grade commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS). Since the
underlying assets are bonds, both the risks and returns are bond-like.
    The second part of the of spectrum is made up of the core, stable income-producing
REITs, investing in properties that generate stable cash flows either from properties
with long-term leases and with many lessors (typically residential real estate) or from
sale-leaseback transactions. Because in a sale-leaseback transaction the owner of
the property sells the property to an investor and leases the property for continued
use, the risk of default is low, providing investors a stable and relatively safe return.
Additionally, real estate investors often use sale leaseback structures to secure financing
in a cost-efficient way or to reduce their leverage. Overall, the returns are relatively
higher compared to low-risk senior debt and are generally bond-like because the main
source of return comes from long-term lease payments.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
104   Learning Module 4                                                          Real Estate and Infrastructure


                              The third and fourth parts of the spectrum offer higher, riskier, and less predict-
                          able potential returns; the main source of return moves away from the predictable,
                          bond-like, contractual cash flows and is replaced by more speculative sources from
                          potential price appreciation. The main source of return for core-plus holdings comes
                          from leases, but the cost of acquiring these leases and maintaining and updating the
                          underlying properties may become significant, particularly when the property needs
                          refurbishment, renovation, and redevelopment. For value-add real estate, the returns
                          are increasingly equity-like, with the price appreciation component becoming pro-
                          gressively meaningful.
                              The final, fifth phase of the spectrum provides the greatest return potential at
                          the expense of the highest levels of risk from opportunistic real estate. For instance,
                          investments in distressed properties and in property development are subject to
                          greater risks than investments in properties in sound financial condition or with
                          stable operations, such as core real estate. The increasing equity-like return reflects
                          that property development is subject to special risks, including regulatory issues,
                          construction delays, and cost overruns. Environmental regulation is one regulatory
                          hurdle, as is the failure to receive zoning, occupancy, and other approvals and permits.
                          Because the lifecycle of such projects can be very lengthy, economic conditions may
                          change. All these issues may increase construction time or delay successful leases,
                          which increases construction costs and reduces the level of rents relative to initial
                          expectations. This could result in a reduction of IRR versus expectation—leaving the
                          investor uncompensated for the higher risk and illiquidity of real estate investment.
                              In sum, real estate investments offer a wide range of investment opportunities along
                          the risk/return spectrum. Also, the amount of leverage deployed in each strategy shifts
                          the risk/return trade-off by magnifying both the gains and the losses. Particularly for
                          the more speculative real estate investors, this can increase their default risk, especially
                          when there are unexpected changes in the level of interest rates, access to financing,
                          or government land-use regulations. Therefore, the performance of real estate invest-
                          ments can vary substantially depending on the measurement period being considered.

                           EXAMPLE 2

                             Peterburgh Real Estate Fund, LLC—Change to LTV
                             The Peterburgh Real Estate Fund, LLC, has acquired a portfolio consisting of six
                             commercial properties for a total of GBP100 million and secured GBP75 million
                             in mortgages from BridgeRock Credit Opportunities LLP, a private debt fund
                             that syndicated them. The terms of the mortgage are MRR + 150 bps, with a
                             maturity of 15 years, GBP5 million in annual amortization, and all mortgages
                             being secured by the first lien on the property. The loan agreements stipulated
                             that the loan to value (LTV) should remain at 0.75. But after one year, the eco-
                             nomic environment worsened substantively and the assessed value of some of
                             the commercial properties owned by Peterburgh declined by GBP8 million to
                             GBP92 million, breaching the LTV of 0.75. More specifically, the outstanding
                             mortgage balance was reduced through amortization by GBP5 million to GBP70
                             million and the value of the property is GBP92 million, which gives an LTV of
                             0.76. BridgeRock and the other members of the syndicate would now require
                             that Peterburgh fix the breach by adding GBP1.3 million in collateral to bring
                             the LTV down to 0.75.

                             Returns to both debt and equity investors in real estate depend to a large extent
                          on the ability of the owners or their agents to successfully operate the underlying
                          properties. Property values vary with global, national, and local conditions. Real estate
                          tends to provide inflation protection if leases provide regular contractual rent step-ups
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Real Estate Investment Characteristics                                                                 105


or can be frequently marked to market. Research suggests that inflation-hedging
ability varies significantly by geographic location, market segment, and time period.
In particular, the inflation-hedging potential of real estate may be more difficult to
detect if the high-inflation period of the late 1970s and early 1980s is excluded from
the period of study. In addition to these macro and micro conditions, the prevailing
level of interest rates influence valuation, returns, and risk.


Real Estate Investment Diversification Benefits
Investors in real estate—whether direct or indirect, public or private, debt or equity—
seek high, stable, and steady returns. Real estate investments generate bond-like cash
flows from their medium- to long-term property leases and offer bond-like returns.
The variability of these returns can be reduced by longer-term leases, better credit
quality of tenants, and the possibility of rent increases.
    Real estate investments offer the opportunity for capital appreciation from the
underlying assets that can bolster returns. In fact, more than half of the returns
commercial real estate investors earn are derived from income, with the rest coming
from long-term price appreciation. Additionally, throughout an economic market
cycle, the real estate income is a more consistent source of return than capital appre-
ciation. This reduces the risk from investing for real estate investors and provides a
source of diversification: stock market returns mostly derive from long-term capital
appreciation. Effectively, investment in real estate is somewhat like a convertible bond
but with several advantages: steady cash flows, the possibility of capital appreciation,
and low correlation between real estate price appreciation and equity market price
appreciation.
    Different investors have differing views on how to approach investments in REITs.
Some institutional investors consider it a separate alternative asset class, some consider
it a sub-sector of the broader real estate market, some consider it a fixed-income/
equity hybrid, and others consider it a fixed-income asset with an incremental yield
advantage over investment-grade corporate bonds.
    Whether listed real estate behaves like stocks or private real estate is a matter of
ongoing debate. The market prices listed REITs continuously, whereas private real
estate is appraised perhaps once a year. This mismatch in appraisal timing leads to
correlation numbers that are artificially low. Additionally, equity investors in public
real estate discount future cash flows, while appraisers of private real estate place
heavy emphasis on current market conditions and recent trends. The various real
estate strategies provide different diversification benefits, as Exhibit 5 shows.



  Exhibit 5: Historical Correlation between Real Estate Investment Strategies
  and Market Returns, March 2008–June 2021

                                               S&P 500 Total      MSCI US REIT        MSCI World
Correlation                                       Return          Total Return        Total Return

Preqin, real estate                                 0.51               0.49                0.46
Preqin, real estate debt                            0.40               0.48                0.38

Source: Annualized quarterly returns of Private Capital Quarterly Index rebased to 31 December 2007,
provided by Preqin.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
106   Learning Module 4                                                          Real Estate and Infrastructure


                          Moreover, during certain market conditions, equity REIT correlations with market
                          benchmarks increase, particularly during steep market downturns, such as the 2007–08
                          financial crisis. As these high correlations remained high during the post-crisis recov-
                          ery, they lifted the value of most asset classes. Similar patterns in financial asset prices
                          and real estate prices appear to have been observed during the COVID-19 recovery.
                              All in all, there appears to be a consensus that real estate offers diversification
                          benefits to portfolios. Real estate markets around the world can be highly idiosyn-
                          cratic and often have low correlations with traditional asset classes. For example,
                          Oxford Economics studied the expected performance of listed European real estate
                          as an asset class, comparing it with equities, fixed income, and commodities.1 “A
                          substantial allocation to listed real estate,” the authors concluded, “does enhance the
                          risk–return characteristics of a multi-asset portfolio.” They went on to recommend
                          larger allocations to real estate for European investors.

                           QUESTION SET


                             1. True or false: Real estate historically has high correlations with
                                other asset classes.
                                Solution:
                                False. Real estate historically has low correlations with other asset classes,
                                and adding real estate to an investment portfolio provides diversification
                                benefits at relatively lower levels of risk.

                             2. The sources of long-term return for real estate investments are _______ and
                                _______.
                                Solution:
                                income generation, potential price appreciation

                             3. In what ways are real estate investments similar to bond investments?
                                Solution:
                                Real estate investments can be similar to bond investments in that they are
                                stable, predictable, lower-risk cash flows from leases that are similar to bond
                                coupon payments

                             4. In what ways are real estate investments similar to equity investments?
                                Solution:
                                Real estate investments can be similar to equity investments in that they are
                                speculative returns that can be realized from price appreciation of the real
                                estate asset




                          1 Listed Real Estate in A Multi-Asset Portfolio: A European Perspective, pg. 2, Oxford Economics , EPRA
                          September 2019.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Infrastructure Investment Features                                                              107



INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT FEATURES
                                                                                            4
              explain features and characteristics of infrastructure

Infrastructure investments have a societal purpose; facilitate broad economic, tech-
nological, and social development purposes; and usually combine land, buildings, and
other long-lived fixed assets. Infrastructure supports public transportation, airports,
utilities (water, gas, and electricity), and more recently, information (telecommuni-
cation, cable, and wireless networks). Early infrastructure investments were typically
financed by private corporations to realize profits. Subsequently, many governments
took on a larger proportion of infrastructure investment and by the second half of
the 20th century became the main source of investments. The late 20th century saw
waves of privatizations of public transportation, and the scope of private infrastructure
investment expanded to assets that governments had historically financed, owned,
and operated themselves. The market for privately funded infrastructure is sizeable.


Infrastructure Investments
Infrastructure investments are real, capital-intensive, and long-lived assets intended
for public use and provide essential services, such as airports, health care facilities,
and sewage treatment plants. These investments have similarities to and differences
from common equity and debt. Investments include equity, with its usual claims to
residual cash flows, and debt, to finance and maintain such investments. Like real
estate, investment in existing infrastructure involves acquiring unique, illiquid assets
with distinct locations, features, and uses. Investments in construction and develop-
ment of new infrastructure are made with expectations to generate cash either from
income or from capital appreciation.
    Infrastructure investments often involve a consortium that combines one or
several strategic partners that have specialized operational or technical skills with
the financial investors. Rather than leases or rentals from commercial or residential
tenants, infrastructure cash flows in most cases arise from contractual payments,
such as the following:
   ■   Availability payments, which are payments are received to make the facility
       available
   ■   Usage-based payments, such as tolls and fees for using the facilities
   ■   “Take-or-pay” arrangements, which obligate buyers to pay a minimum pur-
       chase price to sellers for a pre-agreed volume.
    Allocations to infrastructure investments are driven both by the increased demand
for infrastructure and by many governments’ search for alternative funding sources for
infrastructure investments, such as investors interested and experienced in building,
managing, and running infrastructure. Investors have an interest in financing infrastruc-
ture investments, demand-side growth. As governments provide more opportunities by
expanding infrastructure assets, they also continue to privatize government services.
    Most infrastructure assets are financed, owned, and operated by governments,
and a substantive proportion of these investments comes from public sources in the
developing world. However, increasingly infrastructure is being financed privately
through public–private partnerships (PPPs) by local, regional, and national govern-
ments. A public–private partnership is typically defined as a long-term contractual
relationship between the public and private sectors for the purpose of having the
private sector deliver a project or service traditionally provided by the public sector.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
108   Learning Module 4                                                          Real Estate and Infrastructure


                          Infrastructure investors may intend to lease the assets back to the government, to sell
                          newly constructed assets to the government, or to hold and operate the assets until
                          they reach operational maturity or perhaps for even longer.
                              Infrastructure investments are also made in partnership with development finance
                          institutions, which are specialized financial intermediaries that provide risk capital
                          for economic development projects on a non-commercial basis. There are global,
                          international, national, and local development finance institutions. For instance, the
                          European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) invests to improve
                          municipal services, including infrastructure, and regularly taps global financial markets
                          to finance infrastructure and other types of investments.

                          Categories of Infrastructure Investments
                          To categorize infrastructure investments, investors frequently rely on the underlying
                          assets, with the broadest categorization distinguishing between economic and social
                          infrastructure assets, as shown in Exhibit 6.



                             Exhibit 6: Categorizing Infrastructure Investments

                                     Economic Infrastructure Investments

                                              Information and
                          Transportation      Communication          Utility and          Social Infrastructure
                          Assets              Technology Assets      Energy Assets        Investments
                          ▫ roads             ▫ telecommunication    ▫ electrical grid    ▫ educational assets
                          ▫ bridges           towers                 ▫ power gener-       ▫ health care assets
                          ▫ tunnels           ▫ data centers         ation, transmis-     ▫ social housing
                          ▫ airports                                 sion, distribution   ▫ correctional facilities
                          ▫ seaports                                 ▫ potable water      ▫ government/municipal
                          ▫ railway systems                          production           buildings
                                                                     ▫ gas storage and
                                                                     distribution
                                                                     ▫ liquefied natu-
                                                                     ral gas terminals
                                                                     ▫ oil and gas
                                                                     infrastructure
                                                                     ▫ solid waste
                                                                     treatment

                          Economic infrastructure investments support economic activity through transpor-
                          tation assets, information and communication technology (ICT) assets, and utility
                          and energy assets:
                              ■   Transportation assets include roads, bridges, tunnels, airports, seaports,
                                  and heavy and light/urban railway systems. Income will usually be linked
                                  to demand based on traffic, airport and seaport charges, tolls, and rail fares
                                  and hence is deemed to carry market risk.
                              ■   ICT assets include infrastructure that stores, broadcasts, and transmits
                                  information or data, such as telecommunication towers and data centers.
                              ■   Utility and energy assets generate power and produce potable water; trans-
                                  mit, store, and distribute gas, water, and electricity; and treat solid waste.
                              Utility investments encompass environmentally sustainable development, with an
                          increasing focus on renewable technologies, including solar, wind, and waste-to-energy
                          power generation. Other energy assets may encompass downstream oil and gas
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Infrastructure Investment Features                                                        109


infrastructure, the electrical grid, and liquefied natural gas terminals. The income
earned from utility assets may also carry demand risk because buyers’ energy and
natural resources needs fluctuate. Alternatively, utilities can institute “take-or-pay”
arrangements, locking buyers into minimum purchases whether supply is needed or
not. Buyers usually have recourse if the utility falls short on performance or delivers
supplies that are late or of inferior quality.
    Social infrastructure investments are directed toward human activities and
include such assets as educational, health care, social housing, and correctional
facilities, with the focus on providing, operating, and maintaining the asset infra-
structure. The relevant services administered through those facilities are usually
provided separately by the public authority or by a private service provider contracted
by the public authority. In some countries, this model has been extended to other
public infrastructure, including government and municipal buildings. Income from
social infrastructure is typically derived from a type of lease payment that depends
on availability payments and on managing and maintaining the asset according to
predefined standards.

EXAMPLE 3

  Clarkswood Infrastructure Fund LP
  Clarkswood Infrastructure Fund LP invests its assets in equity and equity-like
  securities and debt issued by issuers that own or operate infrastructure assets
  in developed and developing countries. Infrastructure lays the foundation of
  basic services, facilities, and institutions on which the growth and development
  of a nation and country directly depend. More specifically, in several devel-
  oped countries, such as the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia,
  many infrastructure assets have been privatized as national, state, and local
  governments spend less on building, investing, maintaining, and operating
  infrastructure. The private sector has stepped in to provide equity financing to
  fund infrastructure.
      For instance, the fund invests in an operator of Australian toll roads listed
  on the Australian Stock Exchange, as well as the operator of the Auckland
  Airport (New Zealand’s largest airport), also listed on a stock exchange. It also
  invests in several corporations that provide infrastructure services in both the
  developing world and the developed world, including China and India, that see
  significant demand for infrastructure products and services and seek private
  sector investments. The fund invests up to 50% of its assets in US assets, up
  to 30% in infrastructure assets located in OECD (Organisation for Economic
  Co-operation and Development) countries, up to 30% in assets in non-OECD
  countries, and no more than 10% in any country with no more than 5% in any
  infrastructure provider.


Stages of Infrastructure Development
Infrastructure investments can also be categorized by the underlying assets’ stage of
development. Typically, we distinguish among greenfield investments, secondary-stage
investments, and brownfield investments.
    Greenfield investments, developing new assets and new infrastructure, are oppor-
tunistic investments. The intent may be to lease or sell the assets to the government
after construction or to hold and operate the assets. If they are held, it can be over
the long term or for a shorter period until operational maturity, with subsequent sale
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
110   Learning Module 4                                                          Real Estate and Infrastructure


                          to new investors, thus ensuring capital appreciation to reflect the construction and
                          commissioning risk. Greenfield investors typically invest alongside strategic investors
                          or developers that specialize in developing the underlying assets.
                              The greenfield investment life cycle common among public–private partnerships is
                          called the build-operate-transfer (BOT) life cycle and is shown in Exhibit 7. The build
                          phase is often characterized by an initial longer approval and construction phase with
                          negative cash flows. The subsequent operate phase is governed by a concession agree-
                          ment in which the private investor generates income based on pre-agreed parameters.
                          In the final transfer phase, the investment is transferred to a government entity based
                          on pre-determined parameters, sold to a third party, or decommissioned.



                             Exhibit 7: Illustrative Build-Operate-Transfer Model for Greenfield
                             Infrastructure

                                                                                                         Transfer


                                                                        Operate


                                                                                                Return
                                           Build
                                                                            Cash Inflows




                                                                                                         Years


                                                               Cash Outflows/Expenses




                          Brownfield investments expand existing facilities and may involve privatization of
                          public assets or a sale leaseback of completed greenfield projects. They are charac-
                          terized by a shorter investment period with immediate cash flows and an operating
                          history. Typically, some of the assets’ financial and operating history is available, and
                          so brownfield investments may be sought after by both strategic investors specializ-
                          ing in operating the assets and—particularly with privatizations—financial investors
                          focused on long-term, stable returns.
                              Secondary-stage investments invest in existing infrastructure facilities or fully
                          operational assets that do not require further investment or development over the
                          investment horizon. These assets generate immediate cash flow and returns expected
                          over the investment period. Some assets never reach this stage because they contin-
                          uously require additional capital and development.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Infrastructure Investment Features                                                                                     111


Forms of Infrastructure Investment
As with real estate investments, infrastructure investments come in a variety of forms.
The choice affects liquidity, cash flow, and income streams. Infrastructure investments
can be direct or indirect. The vast majority of investors focus on equity investments,
with some interest in pure debt (infrastructure bonds) and convertible debt.
     ■   Direct investment in the underlying infrastructure provides control and the
         opportunity to capture full value. It requires a large investment and results
         in both concentration and liquidity risks while the assets are managed and
         operated. Because of this risk and the typical long-term horizon, direct
         infrastructure investment usually takes place with a group or consortium
         of strategic investors that share the financial risk and/or assume a specific
         role in building, operating, or managing the assets. Such strategic partners,
         such as large pension funds or sovereign wealth funds, are frequent direct
         investors because they are better placed to manage certain risks to limit
         individual concentration risk. Frequently these funds invest under specific
         mandates in infrastructure projects and specifically prioritize domestic
         infrastructure needs.


EXAMPLE 4

   Public–Private Partnership, Iguá Saneamento S.A.
   In March 2021, the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board paid CAD270 mil-
   lion (BRL1,178 million) for a 45% stake in Iguá Saneamento S.A. (Iguá), a water
   and sewage service company operating 18 concessions and contracts across
   five Brazilian states. The company serves more than 6 million people, provides
   sanitation services, and is the third-largest Brazilian private water and sewage
   treatment service provider.
       The objective of the transaction is to support Iguá’s growth objectives and to
   maintain operating funds to support its operations. Iguá is considering acquiring
   additional water and sanitation concessions in Brazil, including the formation of
   public–private partnerships there. Other institutional investors include Alberta
   Investment Management Corporation (39%), BNDES Participações S.A. (11%),
   and IG4 Capital Group (11%).

    • Indirect investments include infrastructure funds (similar in structure to private
equity funds and either closed end or open end), infrastructure ETFs, and holding equity
in publicly traded infrastructure providers, or master limited partnerships (MLPs).
Investors concerned about liquidity and diversification may choose publicly traded
infrastructure securities. Publicly traded infrastructure securities benefit from liquidity,
reasonable fees, transparent governance, observable market prices, and transparent
pricing, in addition to diversification among underlying assets. An investor should
be aware, however, that publicly traded infrastructure securities represent a small
segment of infrastructure investment: S&P Dow Jones Indices reported a total global
market cap of USD2.23 trillion as of 31 December 2021.2 Publicly traded infrastructure
investments also tend to be clustered in certain asset categories.




2 S&P Dow Jones Indices, “Approaches to Benchmarking Listed Infrastructure” (June 2022, p. 3). www​
.spglobal​.com/​spdji/​en/​documents/​research/​research​-approaches​-to​-benchmarking​-listed​-infrastructure​.pdf.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
112   Learning Module 4                                                          Real Estate and Infrastructure


                              Master limited partnerships (MLPs) trade on exchanges, are pass-through entities
                          like REITs, and share the income pass-through structure taxation rules that minimize
                          double taxation for investors. MLPs are most commonly used in energy transportation,
                          processing, or storage; generate relatively stable cash flows from fee-based income;
                          and distribute larger parts of their free cash flow to their investors.
                              Debt financing for infrastructure projects can be both private debt and publicly
                          traded debt. Normally, the terms are flexible to accommodate periods of zero cash
                          flow and long development or investment horizons. Publicly issued debt, such as the
                          Airport Authority of Hong Kong perpetual bonds and Indonesian Infrastructure Fund
                          US dollar bonds highlighted in earlier fixed-income modules are other approaches to
                          financing infrastructure projects.

                           QUESTION SET


                             1. Infrastructure cash flows primarily arise from:
                                 A. dividends.
                                 B. commercial tenants.
                                 C. contractual payments.
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is C. Rather than leases or rentals from commercial or
                                residential tenants, infrastructure cash flows arise from contractual pay-
                                ments, such as: availability payments (payments are received to make the
                                facility available), usage-based payments (e.g., tolls and fees for using the
                                facilities), and “take-or-pay” arrangements (which obligate buyers to pay a
                                minimum purchase price to sellers for a pre-agreed volume).

                             2. Most infrastructure assets are financed, owned, and operated by:
                                 A. governments.
                                 B. public–private partnerships.
                                 C. development finance institutions.
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is A. Most infrastructure assets are financed, owned,
                                and operated by governments, and a substantive proportion of these invest-
                                ments comes from public sources in the developing world. However, in-
                                creasingly infrastructure is being financed privately through public–private
                                partnerships by local, regional, and national governments. Infrastructure
                                investments are also made in partnership with development finance institu-
                                tions, which are specialized financial intermediaries that provide risk capital
                                for economic development projects on a non-commercial basis.

                             3. Which of these statements about infrastructure investing is true? Infrastruc-
                                ture investments:
                                 A. can generate cash income.
                                 B. are intended to be non-profit.
                                 C. do not have capital appreciation.
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is A. Investments in construction and development of
                                new infrastructure are made with expectations to generate cash either from
                                income or from capital appreciation.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Infrastructure Investment Characteristics                                                                         113


  4. Which of the following is a characteristic of direct investment in
     infrastructure?
      A. High liquidity
      B. Concentration risk
      C. Short-term horizon
     Solution:
     The correct answer is B. Direct investment in infrastructure requires a large
     investment and results in both concentration and liquidity risks while the
     assets are managed and operated. Because of these risks and the typical
     long-term horizon, direct infrastructure investment usually takes place with
     a group or consortium of strategic investors that share the financial risk
     and/or assume a specific role in building, operating, or managing the assets.




INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT CHARACTERISTICS
                                                                                                              5
                explain the investment characteristics of infrastructure investments

The type of the underlying infrastructure investment, its stage of development, its
geographic location, and the way the investment is structured define the expected
risk and returns, as Exhibit 8 depicts.



  Exhibit 8: Infrastructure Investment Characteristics
                            Social                     Regulated               Demand-Based
                       Infrastructure                  Industry                Infrastructure
  Expected Return
                                                                                 Greenfield

                                                                              Renewable
                                                                               energy

                                                                    Airport
                                                                  expansion   New toll
                                                                               roads
                                              Brownfield


                                                             Ports
                      Secondary                       Power
                        Stage                    infrastructure
                              Existing toll
                                 roads
                    Hospitals


                                                                                              Expected Risk




In the three groupings of the infrastructure development cycle—greenfield, operational
secondary-stage, and brownfield—the operational secondary-stage assets with an
existing track record of generating steady, bond-like cash flows possess the lowest risk
and offer the lowest return to the investors. Brownfield investments, redevelopment
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
114   Learning Module 4                                                          Real Estate and Infrastructure


                          of existing infrastructure, are incrementally riskier, and greenfield projects are the
                          riskiest. Exhibit 9 shows the historical risk and return statistics for infrastructure
                          assets compared to other real asset categories.



                             Exhibit 9: Historical Annualized Return and Standard Deviation of Return
                             for Infrastructure and Real Assets, March 2008–June 2021

                                                                               Average         Standard         Coefficient of
                          Annualized                                            return         deviation          variation

                          Preqin, infrastructure                                 8.57%            0.07               0.82
                          Preqin, natural resources                              3.29%            0.09               2.66
                          Preqin, real estate                                    3.43%            0.10               2.86
                          S&P Infrastructure Total Return                        3.52%            0.19               5.52
                          MSCI US REIT Total Return                              7.77%            0.26               3.38

                          Source: Annualized quarterly returns of Private Capital Quarterly Index rebased to 31 December 2007,
                          provided by Preqin.

                          Additionally, the type of infrastructure investment is material in determining the risk
                          and return. While investments in basic social services infrastructure or existing reg-
                          ulated industries typically involve less risk and lower expected return, demand-based
                          infrastructure projects often build on projections of future economic growth and
                          increased usage demands and are riskier.
                              In developing market economies, where infrastructure investments are needed to
                          underpin economic, social, and societal growth and benefit from increased wealth
                          created by the economy, risks are considerable, but the returns—over long time
                          horizons—are considerable. Greenfield infrastructure projects in developing countries
                          offer exceptional return opportunities over very long time horizons. Exhibit 10 shows
                          the risk profiles of various infrastructure projects.



                             Exhibit 10: Private Infrastructure Fund Illustrative Target Returns

                          High-Risk Profile                    Medium-Risk Profile                Low-Risk Profile

                          Greenfield projects without          Mostly brownfield assets           Brownfield assets with miti-
                          guarantees of demand upon            (with some capital expen-          gated risks—e.g., fully con-
                          completion—e.g., variable elec-      diture requirements) and           structed with contracted/
                          tricity prices, uncertain traffic    some greenfield assets (with       regulated revenues
                          on roads and through ports           limited construction and
                                                               demand risk)
                          Located in OECD countries            Located primarily in OECD          Located in the most stable
                          and emerging markets                 countries                          OECD countries
                          High weighting to capital            Mix of yield and capital           High weighting to current
                          appreciation                         appreciation                       yield
                          Target equity returns of             Target equity returns of           Target equity returns of
                          14%+                                 10%–12%                            6%–8%

                          Note: Target equity returns are net of fees.
                          Source: Cambridge Associates, “Digging In: Assessing the Private Infrastructure Opportunity Today,”
                          Research Note (April 2017).
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Infrastructure Investment Characteristics                                                              115


Most infrastructure funds gravitate toward the medium- and low-risk profiles, gen-
erating an average long-term annual return around 10%. As for other alternative
investments, less liquid forms of direct equity ownership investments tend to offer
the highest expected return with the greatest risk, while publicly traded forms of
debt offer the lowest potential returns. Assets backed by stable long-term concession
arrangements provide the most stable returns.


Infrastructure Diversification Benefits
Infrastructure investors expect the assets to primarily generate stable long-term
cash flows that also adjust for economic growth and inflation and secondarily expect
capital appreciation, depending on the type and timing of their investment. Because
infrastructure investments typically support services that face inelastic demand and/
or benefit from high barriers to entry, generate steady cash returns, and have a lon-
ger life cycle, equity investments in infrastructure offer lower correlation with public
market equities and the broader economy. Effectively, infrastructure investments
provide an income stream, increase portfolio diversification by adding an asset class
with typically low correlation with other public investments, provide some protection
for changes in GDP growth, and offer some protection against inflation. Exhibit 11
summarizes the diversification benefits of infrastructure investments and shows the
low correlation between infrastructure and other market returns. It is notable that
public and private infrastructure returns exhibit low correlations.



  Exhibit 11: Historical Annualized Correlations for Infrastructure Assets,
  March 2008–June 2021

                                      S&P 500            S&P             MSCI US
                                        Total       Infrastructure      REIT Total     MSCI World
Correlation                            Return        Total Return        Return        Total Return

Preqin, infrastructure                  0.12             0.14              0.33             0.08
Preqin, natural resources               0.68             0.67              0.61             0.68
Preqin, real estate                     0.51             0.39              0.49             0.46

Source: Annualized quarterly returns of Private Capital Quarterly Index rebased to 31 December 2007,
provided by Preqin.

Most institutional investors consider infrastructure investments to balance public equity
holdings because infrastructure has proven to be relatively resilient to swings in the
equity markets. Given the stable underlying nature of cash flows, infrastructure debt
tends to experience lower default rates and higher recovery than similar fixed-income
instruments, and it is less subject to fluctuation over the economic cycle.
    Additionally, infrastructure may better match the longer-term liability structure of
certain investors, such as pension funds, superannuation schemes, and life insurance
companies. It also suits the longer-term horizon of sovereign wealth funds, which
tend to make the largest allocations to this asset class—around 5%–6% of total assets
under management, according to Preqin. Long-term correlation benefits also result
from the fact that most infrastructure assets have a link to inflation through regula-
tion, concession agreements, or other fee contracts whose rates rise to or above the
rate of inflation.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
116   Learning Module 4                                                          Real Estate and Infrastructure




                           QUESTION SET


                             1. True or false: Greenfield infrastructure projects in developing coun-
                                tries offer exceptional return opportunities over very long time horizons.
                                Solution:
                                True. In developing market economies, where infrastructure investments
                                are needed to underpin economic, social, and societal growth and benefit
                                from increased wealth created by the economy, risks are considerable but
                                the returns—over long time horizons—are also considerable.

                             2. Which of these types of infrastructure investment has the highest expected
                                risk?
                                 A. Regulated industry
                                 B. Social infrastructure
                                 C. Demand-based infrastructure
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is C. Demand-based infrastructure investments have the
                                highest expected risk of the three. Social infrastructure has the lowest.

                             3. Which of the following has the highest weighting to capital appreciation?
                                 A. Greenfield assets with limited construction and demand risk
                                 B. Fully constructed brownfield assets with contracted revenues
                                 C. Greenfield assets without guarantees of demand upon completion
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is C. Greenfield projects without guarantees of demand
                                upon completion—for example, variable electricity prices, uncertain traffic
                                on roads and through ports—have a high weighting to capital appreciation.
                                Greenfield assets with limited construction and demand risk have a mix of
                                yield and capital appreciation. Brownfield assets with mitigated risks (e.g.,
                                fully constructed with contracted/regulated revenues) that are located in the
                                most stable OECD countries have a high weighting to current yield.

                             4. Which of the following is true regarding infrastructure investments?
                                 A. Infrastructure investments typically generate volatile cash returns.
                                 B. Infrastructure investments typically support services that face inelastic
                                    demand and/or benefit from high barriers to entry.
                                 C. While public infrastructure returns have low correlation with mar-
                                    ket returns, private infrastructure returns have high correlation with
                                    market returns.
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is B. Because infrastructure investments typically sup-
                                port services that face inelastic demand and/or benefit from high barriers to
                                entry, generate steady cash returns, and have a longer life cycle, equity in-
                                vestments in infrastructure offer lower correlation to public market equities
                                and the broader economy. It is notable that public and private infrastructure
                                returns exhibit low correlations.
                       © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Practice Problems                                                                       117




   PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. A REIT is considered to be “hybrid” if it invests in both:
   A. equity REITs and mortgage REITs.

   B. sole ownership and joint ventures.

   C. direct and indirect property ownership.

2. A direct private real estate investor can reduce taxable income using:
   A. double taxation.

   B. cash depreciation expenses.

   C. tax-deductible interest expenses.

3. The main appeal of the REIT structure is the elimination of:
   A. dividend distributions.

   B. double corporate taxation.

   C. the requirement to report earnings per share.

4. An advantage of REITs is:
   A. low non-cash depreciation expenses.

   B. more transparency than private real estate markets.

   C. lower correlation with the public equity markets compared to private real
      estate.

5. Which of the following tends not to characterize real estate investments?
   A. Predictability

   B. Protection from inflation

   C. High correlations with other asset classes

6. Akasaka Investment Company established a portfolio of warehouse properties
   with a total market value of THB3.60 billion. It secured mortgage financing of
   THB2.61 billion. The terms of the mortgage required Akasaka to maintain a
   loan-to-value ratio of 0.725.
   After 18 months, the portfolio value had dropped to THB2.23 billion and the
   mortgage liability was THB2.35 billion.
   By how much must Akasaka reduce its mortgage liability to return its LTV back
   to the required level?
   A. THB6.00 million

   B. THB8.25 million

   C. THB9.19 million
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
118   Learning Module 4                                                          Real Estate and Infrastructure


                          7. Unlike appraisers, equity investors tend to place heavy emphasis on:
                              A. recent trends.

                              B. discounted cash flows.

                              C. current market conditions.

                          8. Infrastructure investments can be categorized based on the nature of their un-
                             derlying assets as:
                              A. economic or social.

                              B. local, regional, or national.

                              C. usage-based or take-or-pay.

                          9. Which of these would most likely appeal to an investor who wants long-term,
                             stable returns?
                              A. Greenfield investments

                              B. Brownfield investments

                              C. Secondary-stage investments

                          10. Which of the following is true regarding infrastructure investments?
                              A. They cannot be made using publicly traded securities.

                              B. Master limited partnerships minimize double taxation for investors.

                              C. Large pension funds are frequent members of direct investment consor-
                                 tiums because of their preference for a short-term horizon.

                          11. Which of the following types of infrastructure investments entails the lowest
                              expected risk?
                              A. Greenfield

                              B. Brownfield

                              C. Secondary stage

                          12. Which of the following has the highest weighting to current yield?
                              A. Greenfield assets with limited construction and demand risk

                              B. Fully constructed brownfield assets with contracted revenues

                              C. Greenfield assets without guarantees of demand upon completion

                          13. Compared with similar fixed-income instruments, infrastructure debt:
                              A. has higher recovery rates.

                              B. experiences higher default rates.

                              C. has more fluctuation over the economic cycle.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Solutions                                                                                 119




   SOLUTIONS
1. The correct answer is A. There are three main forms of REIT: (1) equity REITs
   that invest in properties outright or through partnerships and joint ventures,
   (2) mortgage REITs that underwrite loans to real estate (mortgages) or invest in
   MBS, and (3) hybrid REITs that invest in both of these types.

2. The correct answer is C. Direct private real estate owners can reduce their tax-
   able income using non-cash property depreciation expenses and tax-deducible
   interest expenses.

3. The correct answer is B. The main appeal of the REIT structure is the elimina-
   tion of double corporate taxation. Corporations pay taxes on their income, from
   which they make dividend distributions to their owners from after-tax earnings.
   The shareholders, in turn, are taxed at their personal tax rate. Equity REITs, like
   other public companies, must report earnings per share based on net income as
   defined by generally accepted accounting principles or International Financial
   Reporting Standards.

4. The correct answer is B. An advantage of REITs is more transparency than
   private real estate markets. As an asset-intensive business, REITs can have high
   non-cash depreciation expenses. REITs have higher correlation with the pub-
   lic equity markets compared to private real estate, and this is a disadvantage of
   REITs.

5. The correct answer is C. Real estate has historically low correlations with other
   asset classes, and adding real estate to an investment portfolio provides diver-
   sification benefits at relatively lower levels of risk. Many commercial real estate
   companies offer multiple-year leases with fixed rents; hence, the income earned
   from these leases is typically both predictable and stable. Moreover, real estate
   tends to provide inflation protection because the lease payments are regularly
   adjusted.

6. The correct answer is B.
   LTV = Mortgage liability/Portfolio value.
   Mortgage liability = LTV × Portfolio value.
   Required mortgage liability = Required LTV × Portfolio value.
   Required reduction in mortgage liability = Mortgage liability – Required mort-
   gage liability.
   Required reduction in mortgage liability = Mortgage liability – (Required LTV ×
   Portfolio value).
   8.25 = 235 – (0.725 × 323).

7. The correct answer is B. Equity investors in public real estate discount future cash
   flows, while appraisers of private real estate place heavy emphasis on current
   market conditions and recent trends.

8. The correct answer is A. To categorize infrastructure investments, investors
   frequently rely on the underlying assets, with the broadest categorization distin-
   guishing between economic and social infrastructure assets.

9. The correct answer is B. With brownfield investments, typically some of the fi-
   nancial and operating history is available. Therefore, brownfield investments may
   be sought after by both strategic investors specializing in operating the assets
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
120   Learning Module 4                                                          Real Estate and Infrastructure


                              and—particularly with privatizations—financial investors focused on long-term,
                              stable returns.

                          10. The correct answer is B. Master limited partnerships trade on exchanges, are
                              pass-through entities like REITs, and may also share with REITs taxation rules
                              that minimize double taxation for investors.
                              Investors concerned about liquidity and diversification may choose publicly trad-
                              ed infrastructure securities.
                              Because of the concentration and liquidity risks and the typical long-term hori-
                              zon, direct infrastructure investment usually takes place with a group or consor-
                              tium of strategic investors that share the financial risk and/or assume a specific
                              role in building, operating, or managing the assets. Such strategic partners, such
                              as large pension funds or sovereign wealth funds, are frequent direct investors
                              because they are better placed to manage certain risks to limit individual concen-
                              tration risk.

                          11. The correct answer is C. In the three groupings of the infrastructure development
                              cycle—greenfield, operational secondary stage, and brownfield—the operation-
                              al secondary-stage assets with an existing track record of generating steady,
                              bond-like cash flows possess the lowest risk and offer the lowest return to the
                              investors. Brownfield investments, redevelopment of existing infrastructure, are
                              incrementally riskier, and greenfield projects are the riskiest.

                          12. The correct answer is B. Brownfield assets with mitigated risks (e.g., fully con-
                              structed with contracted/regulated revenues) that are located in the most stable
                              OECD countries have a high weighting to current yield. Greenfield assets with
                              limited construction and demand risk have a mix of yield and capital apprecia-
                              tion. Greenfield projects without guarantees of demand upon completion—e.g.,
                              variable electricity prices, uncertain traffic on roads and through ports—have a
                              high weighting to capital appreciation.

                          13. The correct answer is A. Given the stable underlying nature of cash flows, infra-
                              structure debt tends to experience lower default rates and higher recovery than
                              similar fixed-income instruments, and it is less subject to fluctuation over the
                              economic cycle.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.




LEARNING MODULE


5
Natural Resources
 LEARNING OUTCOMES
  Mastery     The candidate should be able to:

              explain features of raw land, timberland, and farmland and their
              investment characteristics
              describe features of commodities and their investment
              characteristics
              analyze sources of risk, return, and diversification among natural
              resource investments




INTRODUCTION
Natural resources comprise commodities and raw land used for agricultural purposes,
                                                                                           1
specifically farming and timber. Managing this asset class requires specialized knowl-
edge of the features of natural resources. An increasing number of portfolios include
natural resources, which justifies a separate examination of the sector. There has
been rapid development in offering indirect investment in natural resources through
exchange-traded funds (ETFs), limited partnerships, REITs, swaps, and futures.
    Commodities, such as crude oil, soybeans, copper, and gold, are seen as investments.
Investments in commodities can be either “hard” (those mined, such as copper, or
extracted, such as oil) or “soft” (those grown over a period of time, such as livestock,
grains, and cash crops, such as coffee).
    Timberland investment involves ownership of raw land and the harvesting of its
trees for lumber, thus generating an income stream and the potential for capital gain,
and timberland has been included in large institutional portfolios for decades. Farmland
as an investment is a more recent phenomenon, with only a few dedicated funds
involved. With population growth, weather, and water management becoming more
topical, however, investors may turn to these assets to actively address sustainability.

   LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW

      ■   Investments in farmland and timberland are similar in certain
          respects to real estate investments but also exhibit several
          important differences.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
122   Learning Module 5                                                                             Natural Resources


                                 ■   While raw land’s investment returns occur strictly from price changes
                                     of the asset, both farmland and timberland generate returns from the
                                     assets’ income stream in addition to price changes of the assets.
                                 ■   Timberland’s income stream differs from that of farmland in that the
                                     harvest time of timber can be chosen while crops from farmland are
                                     harvested on a regular cycle.
                                 ■   Commodity investments are typically entered into via derivative mar-
                                     kets, although some investors may find value in investment in physical
                                     commodities directly or through specialized funds.
                                 ■   The prices available on commodities through derivative markets must
                                     be related to the prices on the same commodities in physical markets
                                     to prevent arbitrage opportunities.
                                 ■   The forward price of a commodity will be greater than the spot price
                                     on the same commodity only if the carrying costs of owning the phys-
                                     ical commodity are greater than the non-cash benefits of owning the
                                     physical commodity.
                                 ■   Investing in commodities is motivated by its potential for high
                                     expected return, its potential for diversifying a portfolio of traditional
                                     assets, and inflation protection. Commodities exhibit high correlation
                                     with inflation over the last 30 years, suggesting that commodities are
                                     an effective inflation hedge.
                                 ■   Farmland and timberland investments trade infrequently and in
                                     non-public markets. As a result, they are likely to appear as less vola-
                                     tile than commodities and other publicly traded risky assets (such as
                                     stocks), despite the fact that both asset classes face significant risks,
                                     such as weather-related threats.
                                 ■   Farmland and timberland provide diversification potential to portfo-
                                     lios consisting primarily of traditional assets (i.e., stocks and bonds).
                                     Historical correlations between these asset classes and traditional
                                     assets have been close to zero.



                           LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT

                             These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
                             of understanding of this learning module.

                             1. Which of the following asset characteristics is shared by both farmland and
                                real estate investments?
                                A. Both are liquid investments.
                                B. Both are illiquid investments.
                                 C. Physical improvements are a primary focus of the investment value for
                                    both.
                                Solution:
                                B is correct. Farmland and real estate share a feature of illiquidity: It is costly
                                to find a buyer when sale of the investment is desired. A is incorrect given
                                that both are illiquid investments. C is incorrect because physical improve-
                                ments are a focus of value only for real estate investments, not for farmland
                                investments.
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Introduction                                                                          123


  2. Which of the following natural resource investments is least likely to use the
     real estate investment trust (REIT) ownership structure?
      A. Farmland
      B. Raw land
      C. Timberland
     Solution:
     B is correct. Raw land is typically acquired through direct ownership or a
     partnership structure. Also, raw land has no inherent income stream and
     returns accrue purely from price appreciation, making the income pass-
     through REIT structure less relevant. Both A and C are incorrect because
     both farmland and timberland investments are included in REIT structures,
     as well as other ownership forms.

  3. Which type of investor is likely to prefer investing in commodities using
     exchange-traded products?
      A. Those seeking simplified trading through a brokerage account
      B. Those seeking to gain access to dynamic commodity trading strategies
      C. Those seeking expertise in a specific commodity sector
     Solution:
     A is correct. Exchange-traded products allow investors to gain commodity
     exposure through a simple exchange-traded instrument that can be accessed
     via a brokerage account. B is incorrect because it describes investors who
     choose to use commodity trading advisors. C is incorrect because this type
     of investor will choose a specialized commodity fund for its expertise.

  4. Which of the following describes a non-cash benefit of holding a physical
     commodity rather than a derivative contract on the same commodity?
      A. Interest
      B. Convenience yield
      C. Storage
     Solution:
     B is correct. In market environments in which physical inventories of a
     commodity become low, investors in that commodity will prefer to hold the
     physical asset rather than a derivative contract with the asset as an underly-
     ing. The premium on the spot price resulting from this preference is called
     the convenience yield. A and B are both incorrect because interest and stor-
     age reflect costs associated with owning the physical commodity.

  5. Which of the following statements most correctly reflects commodity sup-
     ply and demand fundamentals?
      A. Supply of commodities adjusts equally to demand for commodities.
      B. Supply of commodities adjusts more rapidly than does demand for
         commodities.
      C. Supply of commodities adjusts more slowly than does demand for
         commodities.
     Solution:
     C is correct. Commodity supply adjusts slowly to demand because of long
     production times; for example, agricultural crops require a growing cycle.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
124   Learning Module 5                                                                            Natural Resources


                             6. Which of the following measures is best used to assess the potential for
                                portfolio diversification when adding farmland or timberland to a portfolio
                                of traditional assets?
                                A. Returns of other asset classes
                                B. Volatility of other asset classes
                                 C. Correlation between other asset classes
                                Solution:
                                C is correct. Correlation between asset classes best reflects the potential
                                for portfolio diversification. An asset class that exhibits lower (i.e., closer to
                                zero) correlation with traditional asset classes (such as stocks and bonds)
                                has better diversification potential compared to an asset class exhibiting
                                higher (i.e., closer to one) correlation. A and B are incorrect because returns
                                and volatility strictly reflect reward and risk for the asset class without
                                consideration as to how the asset class performs compared to other asset
                                classes.




              2           NATURAL RESOURCES INVESTMENT FEATURES

                                        explain features of raw land, timberland, and farmland and their
                                        investment characteristics

                          Natural resources comprise different production inputs that are basic to the economy
                          and everyday life: plants and animals (i.e., soft commodities); energy and minerals
                          (hard commodities); and metals and industrial goods used to manufacture goods and
                          produce services. A notable proportion of natural resource investments are directly
                          through farmland, raw land with exploration and mining rights, and timberland. Direct
                          ownership spans a broad spectrum: from farmers producing grain to institutional
                          investors building solar farms.
                              Many large institutional investors create exposure to natural resources outright
                          by purchasing land with rights to farm agricultural commodities; to extract oil and
                          gas; to build facilities for alternative energy generation, such as solar and wind farms;
                          or to mine commodities, such as iron, coal, and other industrial metals. By investing
                          in these assets, institutional investors often seek to fulfil their environmental, social,
                          and governance (ESG) objectives, such as sustainability, water conservation, and other
                          environmental goals.


                          Land Investments vs. Real Estate
                          Farmland, timberland, and raw land are similar to real estate investments in that they
                          are unique, illiquid assets with distinct geographic location and features, where the
                          latter two characteristics have an influence on the value of the resource itself. They
                          involve forms of ownership capital (claims to residual cash flows). In the case of devel-
                          oped real estate and farmland, there may also be steady cash flow streams (leases).
                              Less developed land includes farmland, timberland, and raw land, as well as asso-
                          ciated mineral or drilling rights. Sources of return include expected price appreciation
                          over time and cash flows, such as farm lease payments (for an owner), farm operating
                          income (owner-operator), farm timberland income, and mineral and drilling royalties.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Natural Resources Investment Features                                                        125


Estimates suggest nearly half of private investable timberland globally is in the United
States. The next biggest timberland regions are Central and Eastern Europe, Latin
America, Australia, and New Zealand.
     There are several differences between real estate investments and raw land, farm-
land, and timberland investments. The first difference is that unlike real estate, there
is limited or no focus on the physical improvements to the land. It is not the value
of buildings, construction, and development that matters but, rather, the quality of
the soil, climate features (farmland, timberland), or geology (mineral rights). In con-
trast, it is the actual, potential, and planned improvements that determine the value
of the property in real estate investments. The location of land is also important; the
closer it is to transportation and markets, the higher the price. While the proximity
to transportation is also a factor for real estate, transportation expenses can be a sig-
nificant component of the price of the products paid by the end-user of timberland
and farmland.
     To make investments in raw land, timberland, or farmland, investors need special-
ized knowledge and understanding of the specifics of the natural resource. Investors
investing directly in timberland need forest investment expertise to manage a forest
over its life cycle. Many large institutional investors that do not have this expertise
rely on timberland investment management organizations (TIMOs), entities
that support institutional investors by managing their investments in timberland by
analyzing and acquiring suitable timberland holdings.
     Both commercial and residential real estate offer a wide variety of financing
alternatives; however, there are fewer alternatives for farmland, timberland, and raw
land. Often these investments are financed through bank loans or direct, private debt
investment. Finally, these are illiquid assets that have a limited number of potential
buyers and sellers due to the specialized knowledge and capital needed for these
transactions. These features are outlined in Exhibit 1.



  Exhibit 1: Raw Land, Farmland and Timberland

                       Raw land                Farmland              Timberland

Return drivers         Price of land           Harvest quantities    Biological growth
                                               Commodity prices      Harvest quantities
                                               Price of land         Lumber prices
                                                                     Price of land
Source of direct       Price appreciation      Sale of crops and     Sale of trees, wood,
revenue                Lease revenue           other agricultural    and other timber
                                               products              products
                                               Price appreciation    Price appreciation
                                               Lease revenue         Lease revenue
Value                  Physical location       Physical location     Physical location
                                               Growth cycle          Quality of timber
                                               Soil quality          Phase in timber
                                                                     production
Main risks             Best alternative use    Weather factors and climate change
                                               Biological factors, diseases
Owners                 Mostly institutional,   Mostly individuals,   Mostly institutional,
                       some individual         some institutional    some individual
Ownership structure    Direct ownership,       Direct ownership,     Direct ownership,
                       partnership             partnership, REIT     partnership, REIT,
                                                                     TIMO
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
126   Learning Module 5                                                                           Natural Resources



                          Features and Forms of Farmland and Timberland Investment
                          Sustained interest in farmland and timberland investments stems from their common
                          nature (everyone eats and requires shelter), the recurring income from crops, inflation
                          protection from holding land, and their degree of insulation from financial market
                          volatility. US farmland, for example, enjoyed positive returns both during periods when
                          US GDP declined significantly (1973–1975 and 2007–2009) and when the United States
                          experienced higher-than-normal inflation (1915–1920, 1940–1951, and 1967–1981).
                              Timberland has been part of institutional and ultra-high-net-worth portfolios
                          for decades, typically trading in large units of land (several thousands of acres or
                          hectares). One of the main challenges of these investments is their long market cycle,
                          particularly in new-growth forest and crops that are picked, such as fruit. In contrast,
                          farmland can be found in much smaller sizes—perhaps tens of or a few hundred acres
                          or hectares. Many farms are still family owned, as is 98% of US farmland. Globally,
                          farmland remains a main source of family wealth.
                              Investments in farmland and timberland—owned directly, owned indirectly, or
                          leased—generate returns from selling crops and timber. Farmland consists mainly
                          of row crops that are planted and harvested (more than one round of planting and
                          harvesting can occur in a year depending on the crop and the climate) and permanent
                          crops that grow on trees or vines. Farmland may also be used as pastureland for live-
                          stock. Farm products must be harvested when ripe, with little flexibility in production.
                          By contrast, timberland serves as both a factory and a warehouse. Timber (trees) can
                          be grown (i.e., timberland’s factory characteristic) and easily stored by simply not
                          harvesting the trees (i.e., timberland’s warehouse characteristic). This characteristic
                          offers the flexibility of harvesting when timber prices are up and delaying harvests
                          when prices are down.
                              As part of the returns generated by selling the output from the land, both farm-
                          land and timberland generate returns from price changes in their output. The market
                          prices for agricultural products and timber may fluctuate considerably over time, and
                          these prices combined with harvest quantities dictate the revenue generated by the
                          sale of the land’s output. Finally, the value of the land may change over time for both
                          farmland and timberland, and these land price changes also contribute to the return
                          on farmland and timberland investments. The return drivers are summarized in the
                          first row of Exhibit 1.
                              For centuries, direct farmland and timberland ownership has been the initial
                          dominant form, with a focus on long-term tax-exempt investors, such as pension
                          funds, foundations, and endowments. That is why the primary investment vehicles
                          of smaller investors for timber and farmland are investment funds, whether offered
                          on the public markets, such as real estate investment trusts in the United States, or
                          administered privately through limited partnerships. Direct timberland investors
                          use TIMOs to select, manage, and sell assets in accordance with investor objectives.
                          TIMOs are often used in conjunction with indirect investment alternatives, such as
                          limited partnerships, limited liability corporations (LLC), and private REITs.
                              Larger investors can consider direct investments for assets with appeal. For exam-
                          ple, Middle Eastern sovereign wealth funds have made investments in farmland in
                          Africa and Southeast Asia. Increasingly, farmland funds and limited partnerships and
                          publicly traded farmland REITs have been launched.
                              These indirect investment vehicles usually involve separately managed accounts
                          that distinguish between owner and owner-operator models; in the former case,
                          owners rent land used for row crops (i.e., grains, etc.), while in the latter, they retain
                          some operating control in the case of permanent crop properties (orchards, vineyards,
                          etc.). Cash flows are typically fixed in the former case and variable in the latter, with
                          investors taking on some operating risk.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Natural Resources Investment Features                                                         127


    Owning physical farmland opens the door to a wider variety of foodstuffs: spices,
nuts, fruits, and vegetables—a much broader array than the corn, soy, and wheat offered
by futures investment. However, there is limited price transparency or information to
guide investment decisions without the assistance of sector specialists. The illiquidity
of direct farmland and timberland investments is also limiting.
    In terms of risk, farmland is highly sensitive to unexpected weather changes and
climate developments that can easily destroy crops and eradicate revenue. The impact
of weather spans the entire growing season, making agricultural volumes and prices
difficult to predict. That is why agricultural commodity futures contracts can be
combined with farmland holdings to generate an overall hedged return. A farm has
an inherent long position in its crop and, therefore, will sell futures for delivery at the
time of the harvest. The following discussion provides a more detailed case study of
climate risks associated with timberland investing.
    There is an indirect benefit from farmland and timberland investments: These nat-
ural resources consume carbon as part of the plant life cycle and their value comes not
just from the harvest but also from the carbon offset to human activity. Water rights are
also part of the direct and implied value of these properties; conservation easements
may create value by supporting traditions and nature conservation. Demand for arable
land may rise as interest in investments that adhere to ESG considerations grows.

CASE STUDIES

   Investing Responsibly in Timberland Assets: A
   Climate-Conscious Case Study
   Campbell Global (CG) is a global investment manager focused on
   forest and natural resources investments. Based in Portland, Oregon,
   with offices in 14 US states and New Zealand, the firm has nearly four decades
   of experience in sustainable value creation. CG is committed to managing its
   forests in a manner that promotes the best long-term interests of its clients,
   while also striving to address economic and ESG considerations. In addition to
   their economic value, forests serve as vast carbon sinks, with trees removing
   atmospheric CO2 and providing carbon storage. In one year, a single Douglas fir
   tree, a common commercial timber species in the US Pacific Northwest, stores
   the CO2 equivalent of driving 400 miles in a standard automobile. Globally,
   the Earth’s forests are estimated to absorb as much as 30% of human-induced
   CO2 emissions.
      Sustainably harvested wood products and materials also store atmospheric
   CO2 long after removal from a forest, with one cubic meter of wood capturing
   nearly a metric ton of CO2 . In addition to carbon sequestration, forests provide
   benefits of clean water and wildlife habitat, recreational opportunities, and a
   source of living-wage jobs in rural communities. These attributes agree with
   the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals and contribute to advancing the UN’s
   mission for a sustainable future globally. With these effects, there is increasing
   awareness that well-managed forests are a critical component of any global
   climate change strategy.
      CG uses scenario analyses to identify climate-related risks beginning at a
   broad country-level scale, narrowing down to a specific property, and then test-
   ing the impact of various risks to a site’s present and future suitability. Factors
   analyzed to gauge climate risks include precipitation patterns, temperature
   fluctuations, severity of weather events, presence of pests or disease, and annual
   average growth rates for commercial tree species. While many climate-related
   risks in forestry are mitigated through active management, during this iterative
   process, CG analyzes the potential positive and negative impacts associated with
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
128   Learning Module 5                                                                                Natural Resources


                             these risks to assess potential changes in net asset value. The following table
                             illustrates climate risks evaluated, their impact on the forest, and the ability
                             to mitigate the risks.
                                                                          ​




                               Climate Risk       Implication             CG Mitigants
                               Change in          Increased fire          Property-specific fire plans; re-evaluate
                               temperature        danger                  target regions/countries for investment
                               Change in          Changes in tree         Vegetation suitability modeling and
                               precipitation      species range;          genetic tree improvement; re-evaluate
                               patterns           increased drought       target regions/countries for investment
                                                  and related fire risk
                               Frequency          Loss of standing        Re-evaluate target regions;
                               of extreme         timber from wind        property-specific response plans;
                               weather events     events                  geographically diverse portfolio
                                                                          construction
                               Presence of        Early onset and         Immediate treatment, which may
                               pests or disease   increased frequency     include removal of affected trees to pre-
                                                  of individual tree      vent further spread of pests or disease in
                                                  mortality               the forest
                              Change in           Increased or            Effects will vary by region, may influence
                              growth              decreased growth        planting stock decisions; re-evaluate
                                                  rates                   forest growth model assumptions
                                                                          ​




                             Climate change opportunities and challenges highlighted in the CG investment
                             process include the following:
                                 ■   Identifying afforestation (establishment of new forest) opportunities
                                     that mitigate climate change by sequestering CO2 emissions from the
                                     atmosphere in trees and soil, while offering many important co-bene-
                                     fits for communities, biodiversity, and soil and water quality.
                                 ■   Protecting existing carbon stocks by minimizing impacts to car-
                                     bon stored on the forest floor through tailored forest management
                                     practices.
                                 ■   Enhancing forest carbon sequestration by replanting areas as soon as
                                     possible so the new forest will quickly begin removing CO2 from the
                                     atmosphere.
                                The ability to quantify, evaluate, and report the year-over-year changes in
                             the carbon footprint of a forest can influence the impacts an organization has
                             on the environment, leading to increased transparency and more-informed
                             business decisions. Incorporating climate change factors in its investment
                             process not only mitigates climate-related risks; it also promotes and enhances
                             the natural solutions forests provide. Understanding and measuring the com-
                             prehensive carbon stores of forests may lead to business decisions improving
                             carbon sequestration, critical for addressing climate change.


                           QUESTION SET


                             1. Identify the three primary return drivers of investing in timberland.
                                Solution:
                                The three primary return drivers of investing in timberland are (1) the
                                biological growth of the timber to be harvested in the future, (2) the price of
                                lumber, and (3) changes in the price of the land.
                   © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Commodity Investment Forms                                                                129


  2. Which of the following statements provides the most accurate description
     of timberland investment management organizations?
      A. TIMOs are entities that use their forest investment expertise to ana-
         lyze and acquire suitable timberland holdings on behalf of institutional
         investors.
      B. TIMOs are investment funds that raise money from individual inves-
         tors to buy timberland.
      C. TIMOs are entities that only facilitate direct ownership of timberland
         by institutional investors.
     Solution:
     A is the correct response. Timberland requires asset-specific expertise,
     and TIMOs use their expertise to analyze and acquire timberland holdings
     either directly or indirectly for institutional investors. B is incorrect be-
     cause TIMOs are not investment funds. C is incorrect because TIMOs can
     be used by institutional investors in conjunction with indirect investing in
     timberland.

  3. Describe one important similarity and one important difference between
     investing in timberland versus investing in real estate.
     Solution:
     Similarities between timberland and real estate include the fact that both
     asset classes involve investing in unique assets with distinct geography and
     the fact that both asset classes have a high degree of illiquidity.
     An important difference between the two asset classes is the degree to
     which value reflects physical improvements to the land. Specifically, real
     estate investing values actual and potential improvements while timberland
     investing does not.

  4. Describe a significant difference in the income component of farmland
     investing versus timberland investing.
     Solution:
     Timberland provides flexibility in the timing of harvesting trees. Unlike tim-
     berland, farm products must be harvested when ripe, with little flexibility in
     production.




COMMODITY INVESTMENT FORMS
                                                                                      3
             describe features of commodities and their investment
             characteristics
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
130   Learning Module 5                                                                          Natural Resources



                          Commodity Investment Features
                          Commodities themselves do not generate cash flows but usually incur costs (cost of
                          carry introduced in derivatives learning modules), such as those for transportation,
                          storage, and insurance for physical commodities. Investors seek to benefit from com-
                          modity price appreciation (in excess of carry cost) based on their future economic
                          value rather than actual use of the underlying asset.
                              Moreover, governments have realized the importance of controlling natural
                          resources and taken an increasingly important role in natural resource markets. For
                          instance, many governments provide food price subsidies to customers and price
                          support to farmers.
                              Governments often control extractable natural rights, such as energy resources
                          and mining. In many emerging markets, governments or government-owned enter-
                          prises control strategic energy production or mining resources. For instance, SOCAR,
                          the State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic, is the fully state-owned national oil
                          and gas company of the country and extracts oil and natural gas from onshore and
                          offshore fields of the Caspian Sea. Moreover, it operates Azerbaijan’s only oil refinery
                          and operates several oil and gas export pipelines. It is a major source of income for
                          the country. In other countries, owners of land may only be able to cultivate the soil
                          and may extract only certain minerals. Often the government owns and manages
                          subsurface rights and has the right to extract certain resources, such as oil, gas, coal,
                          gold, and silver.
                              Environmental factors play a direct role in natural resource investments, because
                          governments are increasingly implementing environmental safeguards to meet climate
                          objectives and control activities with climate impact, such as mining, agriculture, and
                          energy extraction and production. More specifically, global climate change policies
                          seek to reduce reliance on fossil fuels (coal, oil) and increase renewable energy use.
                          To do so, countries are in the process of adopting national programs that intend to
                          increase renewable energy (wind, solar, biomass) and reduce the reliance on fossil fuels.
                              The policy objective of reducing the reliance on fossil fuels has shifted focus to
                          electric vehicles and advances in battery technology. A potential impact of the reliance
                          on low-carbon energy technologies is the higher demand for many minerals and met-
                          als, such as lithium, cobalt, and nickel. As mining activities for these critical metals
                          will increase, there will be significant impacts on local water systems, ecosystems,
                          and communities.
                              Finally, there is growing interest from ESG investors seeking to promote sustainable
                          farming practices or use timberland investments for carbon offsets.


                          Distinguishing Characteristics of Commodity Investments
                          Commodity sectors include precious and base (i.e., industrial) metals, energy products,
                          and agricultural products. Exhibit 2 offers examples of each type. The relative impor-
                          tance, amount, and price of individual commodities evolve with society’s preferences
                          and needs. Increasing industrialization of emerging markets has driven strong global
                          demand for commodities. These markets need increasing amounts of oil, steel, and
                          other materials to support manufacturing, infrastructure development, and the con-
                          sumption demands of their populations. Emerging technologies, such as advanced cell
                          phones and electric vehicles, create demand for new materials and destroy demand
                          for old resources as markets for specific commodities evolve over time.
                   © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Commodity Investment Forms                                                                  131



  Exhibit 2: Examples of Commodities

Sector                      Sample Commodities

Energy                      Oil, natural gas, electricity, coal
Base metals                 Copper, aluminum, zinc, lead, tin, nickel
Precious metals             Gold, silver, platinum
Agriculture                 Grains, livestock, coffee
Other                       Carbon credits, freight, forest products

Commodities may be further classified by physical location and grade or quality.
For example, there are many grades and delivery locations for crude oil and wheat.
Commodity derivative contracts thus specify quantity, quality, maturity date, and
delivery location.
    The majority of commodity investing is implemented through derivatives. Physical
commodities often generate unwelcome tax obligations and costs arising from storage,
insurance, brokerage, and transportation. Additionally, physical commodity markets
lack price transparency. As such, commodity investments are usually made through
financial derivative instruments, most frequently commodity futures and forwards and
occasionally options on futures. Using derivatives to establish exposures to natural
resources has several benefits: Because these instruments are traded on organized
exchanges, they are very liquid and provide opportunities for price discovery.
    Futures contracts are obligations to buy or sell a specific amount of a given com-
modity at a fixed price, location, and date in the future. Futures contracts are exchange
traded, are marked to market daily, and may or may not be settled on delivery or
receipt of the physical commodity at the end of the contract. This delivery obligation
becomes dramatically important during stressful periods. For example, with oil during
the global financial crisis in 2008 and during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, as
demand collapsed, oil producers could not find buyers and global storage filled sud-
denly. Even commodity-related ETFs were affected, forcing some to close and impose
large losses on investors.
    For futures contracts, counterparty risk is managed through the settlement process
between the clearinghouse/exchange and clearing brokers. Commodity exposure can
be achieved through means other than direct investment in commodities or commodity
derivatives, including the following:
   ■     Exchange-traded products. ETPs, either funds (ETFs) or notes (ETNs), may
         be suitable for investors restricted to equity shares or seeking simplified
         trading through a standard brokerage account. ETPs may invest in commod-
         ities or commodity futures. For example, the SPDR Gold Shares ETF seeks
         to track the price of physical gold by holding bullion in vaults. It owned just
         under USD53 billion in gold bullion as of December 2022. ETPs may use
         leverage and may replicate the pay-offs from a long or short position, with
         the latter form considered inverse or “bearish.” Similar to mutual funds or
         unit trusts, ETPs charge fees included in their expense ratios.
   ■     Investing with commodity trading advisers. CTAs are another way to gain
         commodity exposure. CTAs are managed futures funds that make direc-
         tional investments primarily in futures markets based on technical and
         fundamental strategies. A commodity-focused CTA might concentrate
         on a specific commodity (such as grains) or be broadly diversified across
         commodities. However, one would need to find a fund focused solely on
         the desired commodity, because modern CTAs often invest in a variety
         of futures, including commodities, equities, fixed income, and foreign
         exchange. Individual investors may establish accounts that are managed in
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
132   Learning Module 5                                                                         Natural Resources


                                  accordance with their specific investment preferences and risk tolerance
                                  called separately managed accounts (SMAs). These types of individual
                                  accounts are common for commodity investments. More details on CTAs
                                  and managed futures are covered in the learning module on hedge funds.
                              ■   Specialized funds investing in specific commodity sectors. An example of spe-
                                  cialized funds is private energy partnerships, which are similar in structure
                                  to private equity funds and enable institutional exposure to the energy sec-
                                  tor. Management fees can range from 1% to 3% of committed capital, with a
                                  typical life span of 10 years and extensions of 1- and 2-year periods. Publicly
                                  available energy mutual funds and unit trusts typically focus on the oil and
                                  gas sector, often acting as fixed-income investments to pay dividends from
                                  rents or capital gains. They may focus on upstream (drilling), midstream
                                  (refineries), or downstream (chemicals). Their management fees are compa-
                                  rable with those of other public equity managers and range from 0.4% to 1%.
                              Commodity investments are typically direct underwriting of the acquisition,
                          management, and extraction of the natural resource itself. These investments usually
                          involve direct or indirect claims to physical assets themselves and not claims on
                          residual (equity) or fixed (debt) cash flows.
                              This indirect approach, however, comes with the added risks from financing and
                          operations and, when privately held, the impact of additional illiquidity.


                          Basics of Commodity Pricing
                          Investors seeking to benefit from direct commodity price exposure typically use
                          derivative instruments, such as exchange-traded futures and options and forwards,
                          with individual commodities or an index as the underlying asset. Different commodity
                          indexes are composed of different commodities and have materially different index
                          weights, which determines varying exposures to not only specific commodities but
                          also commodity sectors. However, as we will see later in this module, the correlation
                          between commodities and traditional asset classes is typically low, which means
                          improved portfolio diversification is possible regardless of the index chosen.
                               Since commodities trade in both physical and financial markets, there is a direct
                          relationship between their prices in both the physical cash markets and the finan-
                          cial derivative markets. Such no-arbitrage conditions, which we have encountered
                          earlier in the derivatives readings, dictate that the difference in prices between the
                          cash or spot markets and derivative markets is equal to the cost of carry, which is
                          the opportunity cost of holding these assets, and mirrors the risk-free rate and the
                          cost of storing, transporting, and insuring the commodity. The holder of the physical
                          commodity should expect to be compensated via a higher forward price, F0+(T), than
                          the prevailing cash price.
                               However, there may be non-cash benefits from holding the physical commodity
                          instead of gaining exposure using a derivative. Such convenience yield may arise
                          under conditions when the market participants prefer to hold the physical commod-
                          ity; for instance, the owners want to ensure that they have continuous access to this
                          commodity. Usually, the convenience yield is related inversely to inventory levels of
                          the underlying commodity. Because convenience yield is a benefit and accrues to the
                          owner, it reduces the forward price.
                               The pricing relationship between cash, S0, and derivative markets can be expressed
                          under continuous compounding as
                              F0(T) = S0e(r+c–i)T,                                                          (1)
                   © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Commodity Investment Forms                                                                   133


    where c is the cost of carry, i is the convenience yield, r is the risk-free rate, and
T is the time to the expiration of the forward contract. Effectively, the relationship
between commodity forward and spot prices over time depends on the relative rela-
tionship between the cost of carry and the convenience yield.
    Looking at the relationship between the convenience yield and the cost of carry,
there are two relationships. When the spot price is above the forward prices, there
is backwardation, a downward-sloping, or inverted, forward curve. This can occur
for physically settled contracts when the convenience yield is positive and the benefit
of holding the commodity outright exceeds the cost of carry. When the spot price is
below the forward prices, there is contango because the cost of ownership exceeds
the benefit of a convenience yield and the forward price will be above the underlying
spot asset price. As a rule of thumb, a contango scenario generally lowers the return
of the long-only investor, and a backwardation scenario enhances it. The following
example shows how market changes can lead to significant shifts in the shape of the
commodity forward curve:

EXAMPLE 1

   Crude Oil Going from Backwardation to Contango
   In April 2020, the price of crude oil futures on the New York Mercantile Exchange
   (NYMEX) fell below zero for the first time ever; sellers paid buyers to take on an
   exposure to oil. This situation is highly unusual and was caused by the lockdowns
   in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic that eroded the demand for oil. Producers
   could not cut crude oil production quickly enough, and storage facilities were
   overflowing with oil. This caused oil inventories to skyrocket. Exhibit 3 shows
   the NYMEX oil futures price from January to June 2020.
                                              ​




       Exhibit 3: NYMEX Oil Futures Price (US dollars per contract),
       January–June 2020
                                              ​




       80


       60


       40


       20


        0


      –20


      –40
       1/1/2020         2/1/2020   3/1/2020       4/1/2020    5/1/2020       6/1/2020

   Source: Bloomberg.
        The sudden disappearance of the demand for oil impacted the shape of the
   oil futures curve, the series of oil futures contract prices with different forward
   settlement dates. Prior to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in January
   2020, the US oil markets had the lowest inventory levels in over a year and
   expected a continued healthy demand from a vibrant economy. Because of low
   inventory levels, the oil futures curve was in backwardation at the beginning of
   January 2020 because the benefit of holding oil outright exceeded the cost of
   carry of having oil in inventory (see Exhibit 4).
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
134   Learning Module 5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Natural Resources


                                                                                                                                                                     ​




                                       Exhibit 4: NYMEX Oil Futures Curve, January 2020
                                                                                                                                                                     ​




                                                                                                                                 NYMEX Oil Futures, January 2020
                                                 62

                                                 60

                                                 58




                                Contract Price
                                                 56

                                                 54

                                                 52

                                                 50

                                                 48

                                                 46
                                                      Feb-20
                                                               May-20
                                                                        Aug-20
                                                                                 Nov-20
                                                                                          Feb-21
                                                                                                   May-21
                                                                                                             Aug-21
                                                                                                                       Nov-21
                                                                                                                                 Feb-22
                                                                                                                                           May-22
                                                                                                                                                      Aug-22
                                                                                                                                                                 Nov-22
                                                                                                                                                                            Feb-23
                                                                                                                                                                                       May-23
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Aug-23
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Nov-23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Feb-24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              May-24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Aug-24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Nov-24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Feb-25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  May-25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Aug-25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nov-25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Feb-26
                                                                                                                                                               Contract Date
                                 As lockdowns continued into mid-2020, US oil market inventory approached
                             near all-time high levels but demand remained muted. Carry costs then out-
                             weighed any benefit of storing oil for production purposes (and there was hardly
                             any open storage capacity available), and the oil futures curve was in contango
                             at the beginning of May 2020 (see Exhibit 5).
                                                                                                                                                                     ​




                                       Exhibit 5: NYMEX Oil Futures Curve, May 2020
                                                                                                                                                                     ​




                                                                                                                                      NYMEX Oil Futures, May 2020
                                                 50
                                                 45

                                                 40

                                                 35
                                                 30
                                Contract Price




                                                 25

                                                 20
                                                 15

                                                 10
                                                  5
                                                 0
                                                      Jun-20
                                                               Sep-20
                                                                        Dec-20
                                                                                 Mar-21
                                                                                          Jun-21
                                                                                                    Sep-21
                                                                                                              Dec-21
                                                                                                                        Mar-22
                                                                                                                                  Jun-22
                                                                                                                                             Sep-22
                                                                                                                                                        Dec-22
                                                                                                                                                                   Mar-23
                                                                                                                                                                              Jun-23
                                                                                                                                                                                          Sep-23
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dec-23
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mar-24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jun-24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sep-24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dec-24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mar-25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jun-25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sep-25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec-25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mar-26




                                                                                                                                                        Contract Date




                           QUESTION SET


                             1. Compare farmland investment to commodity investment with
                                respect to sources of value.
                                Solution:
                                A similarity between the two is that both forms of investment rely on chang-
                                es in the price of underlying. A difference between the two is that commod-
                                ity investments, which typically rely on derivative contracts, do not generate
                                cash flows while farmland investment generates cash flows through the
                                income generated from harvesting the agricultural crops.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Natural Resource Investment Risk, Return, and Diversification                                135


  2. Which of the following statements is most correct about investors seeking
     commodity exposure through a commodity trading adviser (CTA)?
      A. The investor is seeking to make direct investment in commodities.
      B. The investor is seeking to benefit from an income stream from
         commodities.
      C. The investor is seeking to profit from specific directional trends in
         commodity futures contracts.
     Solution:
     C is correct. Commodity trading advisers devise trading strategies using
     derivative contracts on commodities that are focused on predicting up-
     coming bull or bear trends. A is incorrect because CTAs do not advise on
     physical commodity transactions. B is incorrect for a similar reason, because
     the income stream from most commodities would require direct or indirect
     land ownership, which produces commodities.

  3. Discuss how the relationship between costs of carry and benefits of owning
     a commodity outright affect the relationship between the forward price and
     spot price of the commodity.
     Solution:
     A simple framework for expressing the relationship between forward price
     and spot price in terms of costs and benefits of owning the underlying com-
     modity is as follows:
      Forward price = Spot price + Costs of carry – Benefits of ownership.
     Thus, if costs of carry exceed benefits of ownership, then forward price is
     greater than spot price for the commodity. In contrast, forward price is less
     than spot price if benefits exceed costs.

  4. Explain why low inventories of a commodity may result in backwardation
     for the commodity.
     Solution:
     Backwardation reflects a downward-sloping term structure of prices for a
     commodity. In the near term, backwardation implies forward price below
     spot price. Low inventories of a commodity cause investors to prefer to hold
     the physical commodity over derivative contracts (i.e., forwards). This pref-
     erence will cause price for the physical asset to be bid higher, and if this non-
     cash benefit of owning the physical commodity (also known as convenience
     yield) exceeds costs of ownership of the commodity (such as interest and
     storage), then the spot price of the commodity exceeds its forward price.




NATURAL RESOURCE INVESTMENT RISK, RETURN,
AND DIVERSIFICATION                                                                      4
             analyze sources of risk, return, and diversification among natural
             resource investments
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
136   Learning Module 5                                                                          Natural Resources


                          Commodity prices have risk and return drivers that are often related to but do not
                          always directly coincide with the timing of the economic cycle affecting the prices of
                          common equity and debt securities. Commodities, farmland, and timberland have
                          different return drivers and cycles. Commodities are priced on a second-by-second
                          basis on public exchanges, whereas land generally has an infrequent pricing mechanism
                          and may include imprecise estimates, as opposed to actual transactions. Keeping these
                          market structure differences in mind helps investors consider their relative benefits
                          and challenges.


                          Commodities
                          Physical commodity supply dynamics are determined by production (in the case of
                          hard commodities), seasonal crop yields (for soft commodities), and inventory levels
                          in the short term, while commodity end user/consumer use of these basic inputs
                          drives ultimate demand. Supplies of physical commodities are determined by pro-
                          duction and inventory levels and secondarily by the actions of non-hedging investors.
                          Demand for commodities is determined by the needs of end users and secondarily by
                          the actions of non-hedging investors. Investor actions can both dampen and stimulate
                          commodity price movements, at least in the short term. Gold, a physical commodity
                          and a precious metal, is often a preferred safe haven given its historical use as a store
                          of value among investors and as a non-currency based reserve among central banks.
                              Producers cannot alter commodity supply levels quickly because extended lead
                          times are often needed to affect production levels. For example, agricultural output
                          may be altered by planting more crops and changing farming techniques, but at least
                          one growing cycle must pass before there are results. And at least one factor beyond
                          the producer’s control—the weather—will significantly affect output. Building the
                          necessary infrastructure for increased oil and mining production may take many
                          years, involving both developing the mine itself and the necessary transportation
                          and smelting components. For commodities, suppliers’ inability to quickly respond
                          to changes in demand may result in supply too low in times of economic growth and
                          too high when the economy slows. And despite advancing technology, the cost of new
                          supply may grow over time.
                              Investing in commodities is motivated by its potential for returns, portfolio
                          diversification, and inflation protection. Investors may choose commodities if they
                          believe prices will increase in the short or intermediate term. Commodity futures
                          contracts may offer investors a liquidity premium or other trading opportunities,
                          creating the prospect for a positive real return. In the 30-year period referenced in
                          Exhibit 6, commodity investments outperformed global stocks and global bonds but
                          with much higher volatility.



                            Exhibit 6: Historical Returns of Commodities, Q3 1992–Q2 2022 (quarterly
                            data)

                                                        Global Stocks        Global Bonds         Commodities

                          Annualized return
                          1992:Q3–2022:Q2                   6.89%                4.39%                7.81%
                          Annualized standard
                          deviation
                          1992:Q3-2022:Q2                  16.76%                6.14%               24.39%
                          Worst calendar year              −43.54%              −5.17%               −42.80%
                                                            (2008)              (1999)                (2008)
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Natural Resource Investment Risk, Return, and Diversification                                      137



                                 Global Stocks          Global Bonds           Commodities
Best calendar year                   31.62%                 19.66%                 50.30%
                                     (2003)                 (1995)                  (2009)

Sources: Global stocks, MSCI ACWI; global bonds, Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Index; com-
modities, S&P GSCI Total Return.

Exhibit 6 shows a summary of investment performance and volatility of global stocks,
global bonds, and commodities over a 30-year time horizon from Q3 1992 through Q2
2022. Commodities exhibit the highest average return and the highest volatility among
the three asset classes. The worst performance for both global stocks and commodi-
ties occurred during 2008, coinciding with the middle of the global financial crisis of
2007–2009. As global economies began recovering in 2009, commodities exhibited
their best calendar-year performance. While the data may imply that commodities
behave similarly to global stocks, we directly address the correlation between these
two asset classes later in this lesson. Overall demand levels are influenced by global
manufacturing dynamics and economic growth. When demand levels and investors’
orders to buy and sell during a given period change quickly, the resulting mismatch
of supply and demand may lead to price volatility.


Farmland and Timberland
Farmland and timberland, in contrast, are far less frequently traded and derive their
value from different sources. In the case of farmland, it is multiple growing seasons
over time that generate the return. In the case of timberland, it is the longer forest/
tree growth cycle and the demand for lumber that determine returns once the lumber
has been cut down. The size of the global investable farmland market is estimated at
approximately USD1 trillion, with a relatively small proportion, less than 5%, held by
institutional investors. Institutional investors hold about one-quarter of the global
investable timberland base, valued at roughly USD285 billion. A large majority of
timberland held by these investors is located in the United States, Australia, and
New Zealand.
    Turning to land, Exhibit 7 provides a comparison of returns on US timber and
farmland. The National Council of Real Estate Investment Fiduciaries (NCREIF) con-
structs a variety of appraisal-based indexes for property, timberland, and farmland.
Over the 30-year time period from Q3 1992 to Q2 2022, farmland had the higher
annualized return and timber had the higher standard deviation.



  Exhibit 7: Historical Returns of US Real Estate Indexes, Q3 1992–Q2 2022
  (quarterly data)

                                                                     NCREIF Data

                                                        Timberland               Farmland

Annualized return                                           8.69%                  10.95%
Annualized standard deviation                               6.76%                   5.88%
Worst calendar year                                       −5.30%                    2.02%
                                                           (2001)                  (2001)
Best calendar year                                         22.36%                  33.90%
                                                           (1993)                  (2005)
                                 © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
138         Learning Module 5                                                                                  Natural Resources


                                 Although the data in Exhibit 7 make farmland appear to be a very attractive investment,
                                 it has definite risks. Liquidity is very low, the risk of negative cash flow is high because
                                 fixed costs are relatively high (land requires care and crops need fertilizer, seed, and
                                 so on), and revenue is highly variable based on weather. The risks of timberland and
                                 farmland are similar to those of real estate investments in raw land, but weather is a
                                 unique and more exogenous risk for these assets and does not have the same impact
                                 on traditional commercial and residential real estate properties. Drought and flooding
                                 can dramatically decrease the harvest yields for crops and thus the expected income
                                 stream.
                                     In contrast to the local nature of real estate, farmland and timberland are exposed to
                                 more global risks given that these investments generate commodities that are globally
                                 traded and consumed. For example, there have been interruptions in world trade, and
                                 growing agricultural competition has resulted in declining grain prices. Therefore, it
                                 seems difficult to repeat these returns over the next 30 years. Timberland and farmland
                                 investments should consider the international context as a major risk factor.
                                     Finally, investment in vacant or raw land that has not been developed or prepared
                                 for construction generally involves greater risk than farmland or timberland.


                                 Inflation Hedging and Diversification Benefits of Natural
                                 Resource Investments
                                 Investors often consider commodity investments as a hedge against inflation and as
                                 a source of portfolio diversification relative to a portfolio of traditional assets (i.e.,
                                 stocks and bonds).

                                 Hedge against Inflation
                                 The argument for commodities as a hedge against inflation derives from some com-
                                 modity prices being components of inflation calculations. Commodities, especially
                                 energy and food, affect consumers’ cost of living. The volatility of commodity prices,
                                 especially energy and food, is much higher than that of reported consumer inflation.
                                 Consumer inflation is computed from many products, including housing, whose prices
                                 change more slowly than commodity prices, and inflation calculations use statistical
                                 smoothing techniques and behavioral assumptions. Exhibit 8 shows a summary of
                                 calendar year returns on global stocks, global bonds, commodities, farmland, and
                                 timberland segmented by whether the US CPI (i.e., inflation) is above or below its
                                 median of 2.26%.



  Exhibit 8: Historical Asset Class Returns Divided by Median US CPI, 1993–2021 (annual returns)

                            Global Stocks       Global Bonds          Commodities            Farmland             Timberland

Higher inflation                +9.40%              +5.66%               +22.87%               12.78%               10.44%
Lower inflation                 +5.43%              +4.18%                −9.26%                9.85%                 5.70%

                                 Sources: Global stocks, MSCI ACWI; global bonds, Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Index; com-
                                 modities, S&P GSCI Total Return; Farmland and Timberland, NCREIF

                                 The data from Exhibit 8 covering 29 full calendar years are consistent with the idea
                                 that investments in commodities perform well when inflation is higher and perform
                                 poorly when inflation is lower. This difference also holds if the 29 calendar years are
                                 split into low, middle, and high inflation rates. In fact, the performance distinctions
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Natural Resource Investment Risk, Return, and Diversification                                    139


on commodities are even larger using the three inflation categories instead of only
two. However, there is less evidence that investment performance of farmland or
timberland differs significantly in differing inflation environments.
    As an alternative to presenting asset class returns during higher or lower inflation,
Exhibit 9 shows average return data for commodities, global bonds, and global stocks
when inflation has moved lower, higher, or very little. Here, stable inflation is defined
as a less than a 10 bp move from year to year, so falling and rising inflation regimes
are those years with larger year-to-year changes in inflation.



  Exhibit 9: Annual Asset Class Returns in Falling, Rising, and Stable Inflation
  Environments, 1993–2021
                   40%

                   30%
  Annual Returns




                   20%

                    10%

                    0%
                          Falling                      Rising                       Stable
                   –10%

                   –20%
                                                 Inflation Change

                          Commodities   Global Bonds     Global Stocks   Farmland   Timber

   Sources: Global stocks, MSCI ACWI; global bonds, Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Index;
   commodities, S&P GSCI Total Return Farmland and Timber, NCREIF




Consistent with the data shown in Exhibit 8, the returns presented in Exhibit 9 high-
light that commodities provide greater returns in rising inflation environments at a
cost of negative returns as inflation rates decline. In stable inflation environments,
commodity returns have tended to be low but positive. None of the other asset classes,
including farmland and timberland, demonstrate such large contrasts in performance
based on changing inflation.

Portfolio Diversification
Farmland, timberland, and commodities exhibit potential for portfolio diversification.
Historically, all three of these asset classes have low correlations with investment returns
from traditional assets (i.e., stocks and bonds) during the business cycle. Exhibit 10
shows the quarterly correlation between farmland, timberland, selected commodities,
global equity, and global bond indexes from Q3 1992 through Q2 2022. All three
of the alternative asset classes show correlations of approximately zero with global
bonds. Timberland shows the lowest correlation of the alternative asset classes with
global stocks, at approximately 0.02. Farmland’s correlation with global stocks is still
low, at approximately 0.12, while commodities demonstrate the least diversification
potential with global stocks, given the correlation of 0.41. The correlations of stocks,
bonds, and commodities are expected to be positive because all the assets have some
exposure to the global business cycle. The commodity index, the S&P GSCI (Goldman
Sachs Commodity Index), is heavily weighted toward the energy sector, with each
underlying commodity possibly exhibiting unique behavior.
                                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
140          Learning Module 5                                                                                    Natural Resources


                                        The data in Exhibit 10 also complement the earlier discussion of the potential for
                                    asset classes to serve as inflation hedges. The correlation between commodities and
                                    inflation of 0.54 is much higher than that of other asset classes with inflation and
                                    is consistent with the idea of commodities as an inflation hedge. Neither farmland
                                    (−0.17) nor timberland (0.02) shows a high degree of correlation with inflation, imply-
                                    ing that these asset classes are less effective as inflation hedges. However, the prior
                                    section suggests that the lack of correlation has more to do with their investment
                                    performance not suffering during periods of low or declining inflation. Commodity
                                    returns, in contrast, are negative during low or declining inflation, as shown earlier.



  Exhibit 10: Historical Commodity Return Correlations, 1990–Q1 2020 (quarterly data)

                         Farmland          Timberland        Commodities       Global Bonds       Global Stocks         Inflation

Farmland                     1
Timberland                 0.4352                1
Commodities               −0.1276            −0.1180                1
Global Bonds              −0.0209            −0.0047             0.0006               1
Global Stocks              0.1221             0.0215             0.4106            0.1465                1
Inflation                 −0.1724             0.0166             0.5404            −0.2180            0.0954                1

                                    Sources: Global stocks, MSCI ACWI; global bonds, Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Index; com-
                                    modities, S&P GSCI Total Return; Farmland and Timberland, NCREIF

                                    Overall, investments in natural resource assets exhibit significant portfolio diversifica-
                                    tion potential because of low correlations with traditional asset classes. Farmland and
                                    timberland display somewhat high correlation with each other (approximately 0.44),
                                    but each of these asset classes has slightly negative correlations with commodities.
                                        Finally, commodity prices are often more sensitive to geopolitical factors and
                                    natural phenomena, such as weather conditions. Also, commodity investments fre-
                                    quently employ leverage and seek to capitalize on expected price changes based on
                                    more complex strategies, such as futures contract delivery timing and location, which
                                    will be addressed in later lessons.

                                     QUESTION SET


                                       1. Contrast the pricing of commodities with the pricing of farmland/
                                          timberland investments.
                                          Solution:
                                          Commodities are priced on public exchanges, and their pricing reflects the
                                          latest information. Land investments, such as farmland and timberland, are
                                          traded only when actual transactions occur; thus pricing is infrequent and
                                          relies on imprecise estimates.

                                       2. Explain why commodity supply is usually slow to adjust to changes in de-
                                          mand for the commodity.
                                          Solution:
                                          Commodity supply adjusts slowly to changes in commodity demand
                                          because producers are unable to alter supply quickly due to the need for
                                          extended lead times to affect production levels. For example, increased
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Natural Resource Investment Risk, Return, and Diversification                          141


     demand for a specific agricultural crop requires at least one growing cycle to
     produce more supply.

  3. Explain one rationale as to why consumer price inflation is likely to be less
     volatile than commodity prices.
     Solution:

      ■   One possible rationale is that consumer price inflation reflects many
          additional products beyond commodities (such as housing), which
          dampens the effect of commodity prices on inflation.
      ■   Another possible rationale is that statistical techniques used to
          compute consumer price inflation cause smoothing in the data while
          commodity prices reflect real-time changes on public exchanges.


  4. Analyze the results in Exhibit 9 as to how different asset classes perform as
     inflation changes.
     Solution:
     Commodities clearly perform well in periods of rising inflation and clearly
     exhibit negative performance as inflation declines. Global stocks and bonds
     do not exhibit such clear differences in performance related to infla-
     tion. Both global stocks and bonds perform best during periods of stable
     inflation.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
142   Learning Module 5                                                                        Natural Resources




                             PRACTICE PROBLEMS
                          1. Which of the following possible value drivers does not apply to both raw land and
                             farmland investments?
                              A. Lease revenue

                              B. Sale of agricultural products

                              C. Price appreciation of property

                          2. Which of the following most correctly describes a significant difference between
                             farmland and timberland investment?
                              A. Timberland provides environmental benefits because of the ability of trees
                                 to absorb carbon, while farmland does not.

                              B. Farmland provides a resource necessary for human existence, while timber-
                                 land does not.

                              C. Farmland is commonly family owned, while timberland is commonly owned
                                 by institutional investors.

                          3. Which of the following best reflects an advantage of institutional ownership
                             of physical farmland as opposed to buying exposure to crops through futures
                             contracts?
                              A. Liquidity of physical farmland

                              B. Price transparency of farmland

                              C. Flexibility to gain price exposure to a wider variety of agricultural products

                          4. Which of the following is most consistent with backwardation in a commodity
                             market?
                              A. The convenience yield is negative.

                              B. The benefit of holding the physical commodity exceeds the cost of carry.

                              C. The forward price is above the spot price.

                          5. Which of the following futures market price conditions would be most expected
                             in a period of low commodity inventories?
                              A. Backwardation

                              B. Falling prices

                              C. Contango

                          6. Which of the following characteristics is not a benefit of derivative instruments
                             (compared to ownership of the physical commodity) as a means of gaining com-
                             modity exposure?
                              A. Price transparency

                              B. Non-cash benefits
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Practice Problems                                                                        143


   C. Liquidity

7. Which of the following statements most correctly describes why commodity
   investments are thought to provide a hedge against inflation?
   A. The returns on commodity investing are driven by commodity price
      changes, and inflation partially reflects these changes.

   B. Commodity prices increase after inflation rates increase.

   C. Expectations of higher inflation cause commodity prices to increase.

8. Which of the following statements is most correct about commodity
   investments?
   A. Commodity investments are expected to perform worse in inflationary
      environments.

   B. Commodity investments exhibit high risk because of high leverage.

   C. Commodity investments provide weak portfolio diversification because of
      their high risk.

9. Which of the following statements is most correct if you observe that the cor-
   relation between farmland and inflation is significantly lower than the correlation
   between commodities and inflation (and that both correlations are positive)?
   A. Commodities are expected to provide a better inflation hedge than
      farmland.

   B. Farmland is expected to provide a better inflation hedge than commodities.

   C. Differences in correlation do not provide any information that is useful in
      assessing whether an asset class is an inflation hedge.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
144   Learning Module 5                                                                          Natural Resources




                             SOLUTIONS
                          1. B is correct. Raw land’s value is derived solely from lease revenue and price ap-
                             preciation. Farmland, in contrast, also generates value from the production and
                             sale of agricultural products.

                          2. C is correct. Timberland tracts typically consist of thousands (or more) of acres
                             of land, while farmland is quite frequently owned in smaller tracts of tens or hun-
                             dreds of acres. As such, farmland is much more suited to family ownership, while
                             timberland is more commonly owned by institutions. A is incorrect because
                             carbon offset is capable in both trees (i.e., timberland) and crops (i.e., farmland).
                             B is incorrect because the lumber from timberland provides the raw material for
                             housing, which is a basic human need.

                          3. C is correct. Futures contracts are available on a very limited number of common
                             crops (i.e., wheat, corn, etc.). Ownership of physical farmland opens up the possi-
                             bilities of growing crops not traded on futures exchanges, thus providing a larger
                             universe of agricultural product price exposures. A and B are incorrect because
                             futures contracts provide greater liquidity and price transparency than available
                             in physical farmland, which is not traded on public exchanges.

                          4. B is correct. Backwardation in a commodity market implies that forward prices
                             are lower than spot prices. This can occur only if the total benefits of physical
                             ownership of the commodity exceed the total costs. A is incorrect because con-
                             venience yield cannot be negative. C is incorrect because this statement implies a
                             contango market.

                          5. A is correct. Low inventories of a specific commodity create incentives for mar-
                             ket participants to own the physical commodity rather than a derivative contract.
                             This incentive drives up spot prices relative to forward prices and can lead to
                             spot prices being greater than forward prices (i.e., backwardation). B is incorrect
                             because low inventories of a commodity indicate scarcity and would be more
                             likely to contribute to a rising price for the commodity. C is incorrect because a
                             contango market is the opposite of a market in backwardation.

                          6. B is correct. Non-cash benefits refer to the convenience yield, which causes a
                             preference for owning the physical commodity rather than a derivative contract.
                             A is incorrect in that derivatives provide price transparency while the market for
                             physical commodities is much less transparent. C is incorrect in that the more
                             frequent trading of derivatives on organized exchanges enhances liquidity while
                             physical commodity markets are characterized by infrequent trading and thus
                             poor liquidity.

                          7. A is correct. Commodity prices are a significant portion of consumer prices
                             because commodities include aspects of everyday life, such as food and energy,
                             and thus consumer price inflation will incorporate the effects of commodity price
                             changes. By investing in commodities, an investor is, at least partially, hedged
                             against the inflation that occurs with rising commodity prices. B is incorrect be-
                             cause inflation and commodity prices do not move together, but instead, chang-
                             es in the inflation rate lag behind changes in commodity prices. C is incorrect
                             because in this case, commodity price increases occur before inflation changes.

                          8. B is correct. Commodity investments are typically entered into through deriva-
                             tive contracts, which are highly leveraged financial instruments. As a result, ob-
                             served returns are highly volatile. A is incorrect because commodity investments
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Solutions                                                                                  145


   are expected to perform better during inflationary environments. C is incorrect
   because commodity investments tend to exhibit low correlations with traditional
   assets and thus are typically used as portfolio diversifiers.

9. A is correct. An effective hedge exhibits relatively high correlation relative to the
   risk exposure being hedged. Thus, the higher correlation between commodities
   and inflation implies that commodities provide a better hedge against inflation
   compared to farmland.
© CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.




LEARNING MODULE


6
Hedge Funds
 LEARNING OUTCOMES
  Mastery     The candidate should be able to:

              explain investment features of hedge funds and contrast them with
              other asset classes
              describe investment forms and vehicles used in hedge fund
              investments
              analyze sources of risk, return, and diversification among hedge fund
              investments




INTRODUCTION
Hedge funds originally started as an equity investment vehicle in which offsetting
                                                                                           1
short and long positions protected the overall portfolio against major stock market
moves. Today, the name hedge funds is a misnomer. They are not restricted to equities
or just hedging strategies. Hedge funds are private pooled investment vehicles that
can invest in a wide variety of products, including equities, fixed income, derivatives,
foreign exchange, private capital, and real assets. It is the investment approach rather
than the underlying investments that distinguish hedge funds. Many hedge funds
operate in all kinds of financial markets by using leverage, short selling, or using
financial instruments that are not often used by other similar commingled funds,
such as mutual funds. This may result in a very different risk and return profile than
owning underlying assets themselves.
    The hedge fund industry is in a state of constant change as several hundred new
funds are launched each year, with a similar number of funds exiting or being liqui-
dated. While several jurisdictions around the world regulate hedge funds, often they
are lightly regulated compared with other investment vehicles.

   LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW

      ■   Hedge funds are private investment vehicles with pooled funds
          from institutions and high-net-worth (HNW) investors. Hedge
          funds typically have more flexible investment strategies than other
          options, such as mutual funds and ETFs.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
148   Learning Module 6                                                                              Hedge Funds


                                 ■   Hedge funds are not an asset class but are a variety of investment
                                     vehicles driven by a set of disparate investment strategies. Most hedge
                                     funds utilize some form of leverage to enhance potential returns.
                                 ■   Hedge funds are typically classified by strategy. A variety of classi-
                                     fications are possible, which helps in the selection of appropriate
                                     investment strategies and appropriate performance benchmarks and in
                                     reviewing aggregate performance.
                                 ■   Most hedge funds are set up as limited partnerships, with the portfolio
                                     manager acting as a general partner (GP) and the institutional inves-
                                     tors acting as limited partners (LPs). This is the direct form of hedge
                                     fund setup. For smaller and retail investors, indirect forms, such as
                                     funds of funds, help obtain a hedge fund exposure.
                                 ■   The legal and contractual relationship between the GPs and LPs is gov-
                                     erned by the fund offering documents. In addition, a manager could
                                     draft a “side letter” applicable to some investors only, with different
                                     legal, regulatory, tax, operational, or reporting requirements.
                                 ■   Hedge funds use several strategies, such as market-neutral, relative
                                     value, and event-driven strategies, to obtain diversification benefits
                                     and to attempt to outperform equity markets on a risk-adjusted basis.
                                 ■   Hedge fund strategies are classified by a combination of the instru-
                                     ments in which they are invested, the trading philosophy followed, and
                                     the types of risks assumed.



                           LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT

                             These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
                             of understanding of this learning module.

                             1. Which statement about hedge funds is most accurate?
                                A. Hedge funds are investment products offered to the public and are
                                   traded daily on the OTC market.
                                B. Hedge funds are benchmarked to an index or industry/sector, and
                                   managers use complex strategies to mimic the index or industry/
                                   sector.
                                 C. Hedge funds are private pooled funds, applying strategies with a goal
                                    of maximizing returns while reducing risk.
                                Solution:
                                C is correct. A hedge fund is a pooled investment vehicle that uses complex
                                trading (using leverage, short selling, using derivatives, etc.) and risk man-
                                agement techniques to enhance performance for a private group of accredit-
                                ed investors.
                                A is incorrect. Mutual funds, not hedge funds, are regulated investment
                                products offered to the public and available for daily trading.
                                B is incorrect. Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) are normally benchmarked to
                                an index or industry/sector and typically track a specific industry or index.
                                Hedge funds are benchmarked to either a hedge fund index or performance
                                measured in absolute returns.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Introduction                                                                            149


  2. Which of the following statements about relative value strategies is least
     accurate?
      A. Relative value strategies seek to profit from a price or return discrep-
         ancy between securities based on a short-term relationship.
      B. Relative value funds are inherently structured to minimize net market
         risk and credit risks.
      C. The investments made under a relative value strategy are all within a
         single asset class or sector, using assets with a sufficient price differen-
         tial to arbitrage their movements to equilibrium prices.
     Solution:
     C is correct because it is the least accurate statement. Relative value strate-
     gies often involve investments in different asset classes. A and B are true.

  3. Which of the following statements is least accurate about hedge funds?
      A. Merger arbitrage strategies generally assume that an acquirer will be
         overpaying for the target.
      B. Event-driven hedge funds flourish in a stable market environ-
         ment, where minor deviations in asset prices quickly converge to
         equilibrium.
      C. An activist strategy expects to realize higher returns due to the man-
         ager being more effective in driving the corporate policies or strategic
         direction of the investment.
     Solution:
     B is correct because it is the least accurate statement. Event-driven hedge
     funds thrive in a rising market environment with a high level of corporate
     activity in a strong economy. These are the times that accelerate merger and
     acquisition activity. A and C are accurate statements.

  4. Which of the following is not a characteristic of hedge funds?
      A. Hedge funds are mostly illiquid, with little trading possibilities.
      B. Hedge fund managers use leverage; however, the overall risk is lower.
      C. Hedge funds are a different asset class, with a distinct risk/reward
         profile.
      D. Managers demand higher remuneration and have more discretionary
         freedom in the choice of investments.
     Solution:
     C is correct. Hedge funds invest in traditional asset classes but use a specific
     investment strategy. They are not a distinct asset class.

  5. In January, HedgeAway, a new hedge fund, started operations with an initial
     amount of USD100 million. The fund charges a management fee of 1.6%
     based on end-of-year value and a performance fee of 18% on gross returns
     payable on the excess over a hurdle rate of 8% after fees. The fund ended the
     year with assets under management (AUM) of USD120 million. What was
     the investors’ return during the year?
      A. 16.38%
      B. 18.08%
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
150   Learning Module 6                                                                                Hedge Funds


                                 C. 18.19%
                                Solution:
                                A is correct.
                                Management fee = 1.6% of 120 million = 1.92 million.

                                Growth during the year = 20 million, excess over the hurdle

                                = 20 million – (100 million × 0.08) – 1.92 million = 10.08 million.

                                Performance fee = 10.08 million × 0.18 = 1.81 million.

                                Total fees = 1.92 million + 1.81 million = 3.72 million.

                                Return to the investors = 20 million – 3.72 million = 16.38 million.

                                Investors’ return = 16.38%.




              2           HEDGE FUND INVESTMENT FEATURES

                                        explain investment features of hedge funds and contrast them with
                                        other asset classes

                          As private investment vehicles, hedge funds are distinguished by their investment
                          approach rather than the underlying investments. Hedge funds combine traditional
                          debt and equity instruments with leverage, derivatives, short selling, and other
                          strategies to generate and enhance their returns. The objective of a hedge fund is to
                          generate high returns, either in an absolute sense or on a risk-adjusted basis relative
                          to its portfolio-level volatility. The strategies hedge funds use can make benchmarking
                          their performance relative to traditional index performance benchmarks difficult.
                          Thus, many hedge funds evaluate their performance using an absolute return standard
                          instead of tracking a benchmark. Hedge funds are attractive for their diversification
                          effects because their returns typically demonstrate low correlation with traditional
                          asset investing.
                              Hedge funds normally apply common principles that seemingly increase portfolio
                          risk, such as borrowing money to invest, using leverage (derivatives), and short sell-
                          ing. On their own, they do not hedge risky positions against a market move; on the
                          contrary, they seem to amplify the risks. It may seem like the name hedge funds is a
                          misnomer. However, the investment strategy splits a portfolio such that each com-
                          ponent helps hedge the risks from the other. Thus, by internally neutralizing market
                          risk and by managing the portfolio components, the hedge fund manager can obtain
                          enhanced risk-adjusted returns.
                              While mutual funds and hedge funds seem similar, in that they both invest clients’
                          money to achieve a better risk/reward profile, there are some major differences. Mutual
                          funds managers are paid a fixed compensation and may not necessarily invest in the
                          funds they manage. Hedge fund managers are paid a performance-based fee, and many
                          require the managers to invest in the hedge fund. Some hedge funds incorporate a
                          high-water mark, in which the manager will get a performance fee only when the
                          returns exceed the previous highest value of the fund.
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Hedge Fund Investment Features                                                              151


    Normally, hedge fund managers have a great deal of freedom to make trading
decisions and to decide how to allocate client funds. Mutual funds are highly regu-
lated since they are available to public investors. Hedge funds are available only to
institutional and accredited investors.
    Hedge funds are different from other fund types, such as mutual funds, ETFs,
bond funds, and REITs, in that a hedge fund is privately owned. And unlike many of
these funds, hedge funds are lightly regulated. They are different from private equity
funds, in that hedge funds typically have a shorter time horizon and invest in more
liquid asset classes.
    Hedge funds select investments from one or more asset classes (equities, credit,
fixed income, commodities, futures, foreign exchange, loans, and sometimes even
hard assets, such as real estate). Some hedge funds implement strategies focused on
one specific asset class, while others combine multiple asset classes. Hedge funds
can also be geographically focused or agnostic and implement their strategies across
different geographic regions.
    Leverage—through short selling, borrowing, or derivatives and occasionally com-
bining all three—is often used by hedge funds to enhance returns. Since leverage is
often a core component of the strategy, hedge funds continuously need to monitor
the value of their exposures. This is particularly important when a hedge fund takes
both long and short positions (when possible) solely using derivatives.
    Hedge funds are typically classified by strategy. One such classification includes
five broad categories of strategies:
   ■     equity hedge funds,
   ■     event-driven hedge funds,
   ■     relative value hedge funds,
   ■     opportunistic hedge funds, and
   ■     multi-manager hedge funds.
    Many hedge funds trade sovereign and corporate debt, commodities, futures con-
tracts, options, derivatives, and even real estate investments. However, not all hedge
funds maintain short positions or use leverage. Instead, many simply exploit niche
areas of expertise in a sophisticated manner; hedging and leverage may or may not be
involved. Finally, there are funds of hedge funds that create a diversified portfolio of
hedge funds. These vehicles are attractive to smaller investors without the resources
to select individual hedge funds and build a portfolio of them.
    Hedge fund categorization allows investors to review aggregate performance
data, select strategies with which to build a portfolio of funds, and select or construct
appropriate performance benchmarks. Exhibit 1 shows examples of the five broad
strategy hedge fund categories mentioned above.



  Exhibit 1: Hedge Fund Strategies

Equity               Event Driven      Relative Value   Opportunistic   Multi-Manager

Long/Short             Merger           Convertible     Global Macro     Fund of Funds
Equity                Arbitrage        Bond Arbitrage
Short Biased          Distressed       Fixed-Income       Managed
                                         Arbitrage        Futures
Market Neutral         Special         Multi-Strategy
                      Situations
                       Activist
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
152   Learning Module 6                                                                               Hedge Funds



                          Equity Hedge Fund Strategies
                          Hedging long positions through short selling can be considered the original hedge
                          fund category. Long/short equity funds focus on public equity markets and take long
                          and short positions in equity and equity derivative securities. Most equity hedge
                          strategies use a “bottom-up” security-specific approach—company-level analysis, fol-
                          lowed by overall industry analysis, followed by overall market analysis—with relatively
                          balanced long and short exposures. A contrasting “top-down” approach entails global
                          macro analysis, followed by sector/regional analysis, followed by individual company
                          analysis or any market-timing approach. Some equity long/short strategies may use
                          index-based short hedges to reduce market risk or single-name shorts for portfolio
                          alpha and added absolute return. The following are examples of equity hedge strategies.
                              ■   Fundamental long/short: In this strategy, the hedge fund takes long posi-
                                  tions in companies that are trading at inexpensive levels compared to their
                                  potential intrinsic value and shorts those that trade in the other direction,
                                  with the intention of reversing this trade to obtain alpha.
                                  In all cases, the strategy takes a long position in those securities (buys stocks
                                  or call options) whose valuations are underestimated/undervalued by the
                                  market or have a potential for growth that the market has not yet identified.
                                  The strategy also concurrently shorts stocks or an index to reduce the risk.
                                  The manager typically maintains a net long exposure but may adjust the
                                  amount of net market risk depending on his or her market forecast.
                                  Most hedge funds that use a long/short strategy have a long bias, which
                                  differentiates this strategy from the short bias strategy.
                              ■   Fundamental growth: These strategies use fundamental analysis to identify
                                  companies expected to exhibit high growth and capital appreciation. The
                                  hedge fund will take a long position in these stocks. The fund will short
                                  companies with business models that are under downward pressure and
                                  expected to exhibit low or negative growth and suffer capital depreciation.
                                  Effectively, the spread between growth and value expectations drives the
                                  investment strategy and portfolio performance. Most of these portfolios
                                  tend to end up long biased; hence, they may not be market neutral and their
                                  returns may exhibit a non-zero beta.
                              ■   Fundamental value: These strategies use fundamental analysis to identify
                                  undervalued and unloved companies for which there is the possibility that a
                                  corporate turnaround, with future revenue and cash flow growth, will result
                                  in higher valuations. The hedge fund takes long positions in these compa-
                                  nies to capture expected future stock price rises. Effectively, it is the spread
                                  between value and growth expectations that drives portfolio performance.
                              ■   Short biased: These strategies use quantitative, technical, and fundamen-
                                  tal analysis to short the overvalued equity securities with limited or no
                                  long-side exposures. Managers are often forensic in their fundamental
                                  analysis and sometimes try to expose previously unrecognized accounting
                                  or business flaws. The expectation is that company share price will fall and
                                  thus improve the profitability of the fund’s portfolio. These funds vary their
                                  short exposure over time. Short-biased managers tend to be contrarian;
                                  they are shorting shares in otherwise successful companies. These funds
                                  can be useful additions to larger portfolios during periods of market stress.
                                  Short-biased managers, however, have had a difficult time overall posting
                                  meaningful long-term returns during the past 30 years of generally positive
                                  market conditions.
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Hedge Fund Investment Features                                                                                        153


      ■   Market neutral: These strategies use quantitative, fundamental, and techni-
          cal analysis to identify under- and overvalued equity securities. The hedge
          fund takes long positions in undervalued securities and short positions
          in overvalued securities, while seeking to maintain a market-neutral net
          position. Ideally, the manager achieves an overall beta relative to the market
          close to zero.
          The intent is to profit from the movements of individual securities, under-
          valued ones rising and overvalued ones falling, while avoiding movements in
          the overall market. To achieve a meaningful return, market-neutral port-
          folios may require the application of leverage. These portfolios generally
          seek stable, single-digit returns that are independent of the market (market
          neutral), but because leverage is used to amplify the returns, these funds
          may experience higher risk during periods of unexpected volatility unless
          they reduce their leverage.


    EXAMPLE 1

     Tenderledge Investments LLC—Equity Strategies
     Tenderledge Investments, a fund-of-funds hedge fund, is benchmarking the
     performance of various equity strategies as measured by monthly hedge fund
     returns over a 10-year period, shown in the following tables.
​




Equity Strategies:                                Fundamental                              Fundamental
Monthly Returns               Market Index           Value          Market Neutral           Growth      Short Bias

Average                           0.30%               0.03%              −0.04%               0.03%        −0.5%
Standard deviation                 2.0%               1.0%                0.5%                1.5%         2.3%
Coefficient of variation          14.8%               2.6%               −7.4%                1.9%        −20.1%
Max.                               5.2%               2.2%                1.0%                3.5%         7.2%
Min.                              −8.1%               −4.0%              −2.7%               −10.4%       −11.3%
​




​




Equity Strategies:
Correlation of Monthly                            Fundamental                              Fundamental
Returns                       Market Index           Value          Market Neutral           Growth      Short Bias

Market Index                       1.00
Fundamental Value                  0.80                1.00
Market Neutral                     0.22                0.24                1.00
Fundamental Growth                 0.67                0.64                0.38                1.00
Short Bias                        −0.72               −0.53              −0.23                −0.60        1.00
​




         The market index, measured by the S&P 500 Index, outperformed each strat-
     egy both in absolute terms as measured by the average monthly returns and in
     relative terms as measured by the coefficient of variation of returns. Moreover,
     analyzing the correlations between these strategies shows that fundamental value
     and growth have exhibited high correlation with the market index.
         Market-neutral funds have the lowest positive correlation with the market
     index, reflecting the fact that these strategies intend to generate returns without
     taking on market-level exposure. As expected, the short-bias funds have a negative
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
154   Learning Module 6                                                                               Hedge Funds


                             correlation with the other strategies. Note that over short time frames, short-
                             bias strategies are negatively correlated with the market index–based strategies.
                             However, in the long term, similar correlations may not hold.



                          Event-Driven Strategies
                          These bottom-up strategies seek to profit from defined events that are expected to
                          change valuations, typically involving changes in corporate structure, such as an acqui-
                          sition or restructuring. Event-driven strategies may include long and short positions
                          in common and preferred stocks, debt securities, and options. Further subdivisions
                          of this category by Hedge Fund Research (HFR) include the following:
                              ■   Merger arbitrage: Generally, these strategies involve going long (buying)
                                  the stock of the company being acquired at a discount to its announced
                                  takeover price and going short (selling) the stock of the acquiring company
                                  when the merger or acquisition is announced. The manager may expect
                                  to profit once this initial deal spread (the price between the buyer and
                                  the object of the acquisition) narrows to the closing value of the transac-
                                  tion after it is fully consummated. This spread exists because of timing
                                  and uncertainty over the closure of the deal due to legal and regulatory
                                  hurdles, or the acquirer may decide to step away. Shorting the acquirer is
                                  also a way to express the risk of merger overpayment. The primary risk in
                                  merger arbitrage is that the announced combination fails to occur and the
                                  value of the fund holdings are negatively impacted before it can unwind its
                                  position. Since the expected risk and return on a merger arbitrage strategy
                                  stems from the modest spread in prices, leverage is regularly used to amplify
                                  returns but also increases losses when the strategy fails.
                              ■   Distressed/restructuring: These strategies focus on securities of companies
                                  either in or perceived to be near bankruptcy. In one approach, hedge funds
                                  simply purchase fixed-income securities trading at a significant discount
                                  to par but that are still senior enough to be backed by sufficient corporate
                                  assets. The expectation is that these securities should be valued at par or at
                                  least at a significant premium to the current bond purchase price in a bank-
                                  ruptcy reorganization or liquidation. Alternatively, a fund may purchase
                                  a debt instrument that is expected to be converted into new equity upon
                                  restructuring or bankruptcy, typically called a fulcrum security, and then
                                  either hold onto the equity or exit.
                              ■   Special situations: These strategies focus on opportunities to buy equity
                                  of companies engaged in security issuance or repurchase, special capital
                                  distributions, rescue finance, asset sales/spin-offs, or other catalyst-oriented
                                  situations.
                              ■   Activist: The term “activist” is short for “activist shareholder.” Here, manag-
                                  ers secure sufficient equity holdings to allow them to seek a position on the
                                  company board and influence corporate policies or direction. They seek to
                                  create business changes that move the investment towards a desired out-
                                  come. For example, an activist hedge fund may advocate for divestitures,
                                  restructuring, capital distributions to shareholders, or changes in manage-
                                  ment and company strategy affecting their equity holdings. Such hedge
                                  funds are distinct from private equity because they operate primarily in the
                                  public equity market.
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Hedge Fund Investment Features                                                              155


    Event-driven strategies tend to be long biased, with merger arbitrage having the
least bias; the time to complete a merger transaction typically takes somewhere between
6 and 24 months, while a bankruptcy or a reorganization can take years to complete.

EXAMPLE 2

   Activism of Carl Icahn and Hertz
   Carl Icahn, an activist hedge fund manager, has been financially successful in
   several cases where he took a controlling interest in companies to direct their
   operations for an increase in enterprise value. Hertz, a car rental company, is
   an interesting example. In 2014, Icahn started investing in Hertz and in 2020
   held more than 55 million, or 39%, of its common shares. During May 2020,
   Hertz sought bankruptcy protection because of the impact of COVID-19 and
   the collapse of the global travel industry. Before Hertz filed for bankruptcy pro-
   tection, Icahn’s holdings were worth around USD2.3 billion. After Hertz filed,
   he sold his shares at a loss of USD2 billion, even though he acquired 11 million
   shares only a few weeks earlier.
       Originally, Icahn acquired his stake in Hertz starting in 2014 based on his
   notion that Hertz had a strong brand and operational foundation but was lacking
   discipline and management. And Icahn accumulated a more than USD1.1 billion
   position in the company by the end of that year. When Icahn entered Hertz,
   the company was emerging from years of operational, strategic, and financial
   problems that eroded its financial strength. Icahn put new board members
   and a new management in place, which in the ensuing years instilled fiscal and
   operational discipline. The company restated previous years’ earnings, finished
   the integration of various enterprise-wide systems, and secured a qualified man-
   agement team. At the same time, the car rental industry was impacted by two
   strategic shifts: One was the increased preference for SUVs, and the other was
   the emergence of ride-hailing apps. While the company showed higher revenue
   and increasingly consistent profits, the cost of restoring the company eroded its
   financial and liquidity position. After Hertz came out of bankruptcy proceedings
   in July 2021, Icahn has been closely following the company.



Relative Value Strategies
Relative value strategies seek to profit from a pricing discrepancy between related secu-
rities based on an unusual short-term relationship. The expectation is the short-term
discrepancy will be resolved over time. Examples of relative value strategies include
the following:
   ■   Convertible bond arbitrage. This conceptually market-neutral investment
       strategy seeks to exploit a perceived mispricing between a convertible
       bond and its component parts: the underlying bond and the embedded call
       option. There may be relative mispricing between equity and the convertible
       bond. The strategy typically involves buying convertible debt securities and
       simultaneously selling a certain amount of the same issuer’s common stock
       based on the delta of the embedded call option. This strategy can be sen-
       sitive to bankruptcy risks; however, they may be hedged away using either
       equity put options or credit default swap derivatives on the issuer.
   ■   Fixed income (general). These strategies focus on the relative value within
       the fixed-income markets, with an emphasis on sovereign debt (rela-
       tive value rates) and sometimes the relative pricing of investment-grade
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
156   Learning Module 6                                                                                Hedge Funds


                                  corporate debt (relative value credit). Strategies may incorporate long–short
                                  trades between two different issuers, between corporate and government
                                  issuers, between different parts of the same issuer’s capital structure, or
                                  between different parts of an issuer’s yield curve. Here, spread and currency
                                  dynamics together with considerations around the shape of government
                                  yield-curve considerations drive investment choices and returns.
                              ■   Fixed income (asset backed, mortgage backed, and high yield). These strat-
                                  egies focus on the relative value of various higher-yielding securities, such
                                  as asset-backed securities, mortgage-backed securities, high-yield loans and
                                  bonds, and their derivatives. Hedge funds seek to generate an attractive and
                                  highly secured coupon return and to exploit relative security and quality
                                  mispricings.
                              ■   Multi-strategy. These strategies trade relative value within and across asset
                                  classes or instruments. Rather than focusing on one type of trade (e.g.,
                                  convertible arbitrage), a single basis for a trade (e.g., merger arbitrage), or a
                                  particular asset class (e.g., fixed income), this strategy instead looks for any
                                  available investment opportunities, often with different pods of managers
                                  executing unique market approaches. The goal of a multi-strategy manager
                                  is to initially deploy (and later redeploy) capital efficiently and quickly across
                                  various strategy areas as conditions change.


                          Opportunistic Strategies
                          There are also funds that focus on macro events and commodity trading. These
                          strategies may often use index ETF securities or derivatives in addition to individual
                          securities.
                              ■   Macro strategies emphasize a top-down approach to identify economic
                                  trends. Trades are made on the basis of expected movements in economic
                                  variables. Generally, these funds trade opportunistically in fixed-income,
                                  equity, currency, and commodity markets. Macro hedge funds use long
                                  and short positions to profit from a view on overall market direction as it
                                  is influenced by major economic trends and events. Because these funds
                                  generally benefit most from periods of higher volatility, the active moves by
                                  national authorities, such as central banks, to smooth out economic shocks
                                  likely shrink their investment sphere.
                              ■   Managed futures funds are actively managed funds making diversified direc-
                                  tional investments primarily in the futures markets on the basis of techni-
                                  cal and fundamental strategies. Managed futures funds are also known as
                                  commodity trading advisers (CTAs) because they historically focused on
                                  commodity futures. However, CTAs may include investments in a vari-
                                  ety of futures, including commodities, equities, fixed income, and foreign
                                  exchange. CTAs generally use models that measure trends and momentum
                                  over different time horizons. CTA investments can be useful for portfolio
                                  diversification, particularly in times of strong trending market conditions
                                  and especially during periods of extended market stress when other funda-
                                  mental strategies may be expected to perform poorly. CTAs can be relied on
                                  to profit from having purchased short positions in falling markets. However,
                                  mean-reverting markets, which may cause false momentum breakout sig-
                                  nals, can lead to extended drawdown periods before strong trends emerge
                                  for the CTA. To the extent that many CTAs have migrated to trade more
                                  and more financial products (such as stock index futures and bond futures),
                                  the reliability of CTA diversification benefits has diminished.
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Hedge Fund Investment Features                                                              157


    Commodity-focused managed futures funds are unique (versus global macro)
because there is a constant price tension between suppliers and consumers: High prices
cripple demand (tending to lower prices), and low prices shut in supply (and thus raise
prices). This situation creates a unique balance absent in traditional stocks and bonds.


Distinguishing Characteristics of Hedge Fund Investments
The key characteristics distinguishing hedge funds and their strategies from traditional
investments include the following:
   1. Less legal and regulatory constraints
   2. Flexible mandates permitting the use of shorting and derivatives
   3. A larger investment universe on which to focus
   4. Aggressive investment styles that allow concentrated positions in securities
      offering exposure to credit, volatility, and liquidity risk premiums
   5. Relatively liberal use of leverage
   6. Liquidity constraints that include lockups and liquidity gates
   7. Relatively high fee structures involving management and incentive fees
    While hedge funds frequently invest in publicly traded equity or debt instruments
and often use financial statement analysis techniques to value securities, their return
and risk characteristics generally differ from those of exchange-traded funds and mutual
funds. The typical relative value hedge fund generates returns using a combination of
long and short positions in equities, increases its asset base using borrowed funds,
and implements opportunistic positions in special situations, seeking to earn very
different risk–return profiles than those of common long-only funds.
    Hedge funds are also subject to much lighter regulatory, compliance, and transpar-
ency requirements. With more flexibility in portfolio construction, hedge funds enjoy
leeway to invest in situations in which time may be needed to generate an expected
return and thus are unsuitable for a mutual fund offering daily liquidity. Investors
in modern hedge funds are subject to extended holding periods (known as lockup
periods) and subsequent notice periods before an investment redemption is possible.
Some hedge funds partially limit fund redemptions through a liquidity gate provision
so that assets can be liquidated over a longer time period. Compared to, for example,
many mutual funds allowing easier redemption and guaranteed liquidity on one day’s
notice, such lengthy mandatory lockup and notice periods allow hedge funds more
flexibility than mutual funds or other types of investments.
    A redemption fee may be charged, typically payable to the fund itself (rather than
the manager) to protect remaining investors in the fund, particularly in circumstances
where the redemption takes place during the lockup period. This characteristic is called
a soft lockup, and it offers a path (albeit an expensive one) to redeem early.
    With reduced operating constraints, hedge funds may avail themselves of less
liquid and unnoticed opportunities, the true valuation of which may at times be
opaque. For instance, several hedge fund strategies—long/short, activist, distressed,
and arbitrage—build on highly concentrated, long-term, leveraged holdings in equi-
ties, debt, and derivatives. Building up such an exposure may take a longer time to
execute and unwinding such a position can be complex and quite time consuming,
particularly when financial markets are under transitory stress. That is why restrictions
on redemptions are typically imposed.
    There is also reduced transparency for more complex hedge fund investments and
asymmetric information between managers and investors. This leads to incentive-based
performance fees to bridge the gap between the manager’s and the investor’s inter-
ests. Investors look to earn high returns, and sharing some proportion of these high
returns with the managers incentivizes managers to perform in the interest of the
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
158   Learning Module 6                                                                                Hedge Funds


                          shareholders. Hedge funds are generally deemed riskier from an oversight (fraud risk)
                          point of view, but some hedge funds take less absolute market risk in their portfolio
                          construction than is taken by registered products available to retail investors. A hedge
                          fund’s true market risk and its distinction between regulatory risk and illiquidity risk
                          can thus often be confused.
                              Hedge funds generally utilize active management by experienced managers and
                          an integrated risk management approach. A variety of strategies are possible, which
                          makes each hedge fund uniquely different from others. They can be customized for a
                          specific investor preference. They provide an ability to generate alpha and uncorrelated
                          risk-adjusted returns. Some of the strategies also implement guardrails to insure against
                          significant losses. Such attributes help an investor build a diversified portfolio that
                          stabilizes market volatility within a multi-asset class portfolio.
                              Investors should consider several issues when choosing a hedge fund. Broadly, they
                          should review the limited partner capabilities, including their operational framework,
                          risk management practices, and hands-on monitoring of portfolio performance. As for
                          the GP performance, the investor should consider their fiduciary management guide-
                          lines, manager experience, and alignment of interests towards the fund’s strategies.
                              There have been quite a few reported incidents of fraud in the hedge fund space,
                          including setting up a fund as a Ponzi scheme and reporting false performance data.
                          Some hedge funds had complex strategies that failed during market turmoil. The
                          reduced regulatory oversight, along with the large investments that are typically
                          required to participate in a hedge fund, opens the door for some unscrupulous fund
                          managers to take advantage of investors’ trust in them.
                              While evaluating the investment, the investor should take into account its strat-
                          egy, transparency, liquidity, and reporting practices. In addition, the investor should
                          thoroughly evaluate the fund manager’s past performance and be aware of how the
                          fund compensates the fund managers and calculates the fees charged to investors.

                           QUESTION SET


                             1. Both hedge funds and private equity invest in equity stock of public
                                or private enterprises, and there are many commonalities between them.
                                The following statements are some of the commonalities, and one of these
                                statements is false. Choose the false statement.
                                A. Both are structured as partnerships of investors with private pooling
                                   of funds and are primarily intended for high-net-worth individuals.
                                B. Both utilize leverage to invest in a variety of marketable securities.
                                C. Both are less liquid than mutual funds or ETFs.
                                 D. Both are less regulated, and the transparency/reporting requirements
                                    are not strict.
                                Solution:
                                B is false. Hedge funds normally invest in public securities (including debt,
                                equity, and derivatives), while private equity funds invest directly in private
                                operating companies, which are not marketable securities, nor do private
                                equity firms apply leverage to their fund.

                             2. Both hedge funds and private equity invest in equity shares of public or
                                private enterprises. However, there are many differences between them. The
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Hedge Fund Investment Features                                                        159


     following statements lists some of their differences. Choose the statement
     that is false.
      A. Private equity funds invest for the long term, while hedge funds invest
         in equities for the shorter term.
      B. Typical hedge funds are transaction oriented; they make several offset-
         ting trades. Private equity funds make stable, long-term investments in
         few companies.
      C. An investor normally funds the hedge fund at the start of the invest-
         ment, while private equity funds are committed at the start and
         funded over time, upon demand.
      D. Private equity is redeemable on a periodic basis, while hedge funds
         require a longer-term commitment.
     Solution:
     D is the correct answer choice because the statement is false. Hedge funds
     are redeemable on a periodic basis, and private equity funds require a lon-
     ger-term commitment. The other statements are correct.

  3. Hedge funds versus mutual funds: Choose the false statement.
      A. Mutual funds are open to any investor and are generally more liquid
         instruments with minimal constraints on redemptions.
      B. Hedge fund fees are typically negotiable by an investor, while mutual
         funds operate with the same fees for all investors.
      C. Hedge funds are more restricted in what they can trade compared to
         mutual funds.
     Solution:
     C is the false statement. Hedge funds are less restricted than mutual funds
     as to the securities they can trade. They are also subject to less disclosure
     and transparency requirements. A and B are true statements.

  4. How many of the following statements comparing hedge funds and ETFs are
     true?

     1. ETFs are exchange-traded public securities, while hedge funds are private
     partnership funds.

     2. Any investor can invest in an ETF, while specific restrictions apply to who
     can invest in a hedge fund.

     3. ETFs have very low fees and expense ratios compared to hedge funds.

     4. ETFs are highly regulated, with specific reporting requirements, while
     hedge funds are lightly regulated.
      A. One of the statements is true.
      B. Two of the statements are true.
      C. Three of the statements are true.
      D. Four of the statements are true.
     Solution:
     D is correct. All the statements are true.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
160   Learning Module 6                                                                               Hedge Funds


                             5. Select the statements that are true:

                                A. The primary drivers of returns from stocks are growth projections, divi-
                                dends, and retained earnings.

                                B. The primary drivers of returns from a bond are interest rates, credit risk,
                                and coupon payments.

                                C. The primary drivers of return from hedge funds are market volatility and
                                market inefficiency.
                                Solution:
                                A, B, and C are all true.




              3           HEDGE FUND INVESTMENT FORMS

                                        describe investment forms and vehicles used in hedge fund
                                        investments

                          A common structural characteristic of a hedge fund is that it is set up as a private
                          investment partnership either onshore or in a tax-advantaged offshore location. Under
                          certain legal restrictions (which vary by jurisdiction), the offering can be open only
                          to a limited number of investors meeting certain income and net worth guidelines.
                              Hedge funds, like private equity funds, are legally typically incorporated and
                          organized as private limited partnerships or limited liability companies with a general
                          partner or managing member who is the hedge fund manager. The partnership or
                          the managing member receives a management fee, and the general partner receives
                          compensation based on fund performance. Hedge fund investors purchase a share of
                          the fund or partnership and receive in return a fixed percentage of the fund returns,
                          minus applicable fees.
                              The fund documents—private placement memorandum, the partnership agreement,
                          or the articles of incorporation—lay out the legal and contractual relationship between
                          the fund manager and the fund investor and create the operational framework for the
                          fund. Normally, the fund structures are incorporated as perpetual legal entities, but
                          in reality, as the hedge funds close, they are liquidated on a regular basis.


                          Direct Hedge Fund Investment Forms
                          A common hedge fund form is a master feeder structure. The master feeder structure
                          is set up for optimum tax efficiency and consists of an offshore feeder fund and an
                          onshore feeder fund—both feeding into a master fund that invests the capital based
                          on its contractual partnership agreements. This structure is depicted in Exhibit 2.
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Hedge Fund Investment Forms                                                                  161



  Exhibit 2: Sample Master-feeder Structure

                                                       The TED Fund LLC
                          The Fund LLC              (Tax Exempt and
                           (Onshore)               Deferred Investors)




                                           The Cayman Fund LDC
                                                (Offshore)




                                         Master Fund




                                       Investment Funds




A common hedge fund fee structure is known as “two and twenty.” In this setup, the
hedge fund partnership entity that operates and administers the fund receives a 2%
management fee. The general partner, who manages the fund investments, receives 20%
of the fund’s net profits. The investment returns, after management and performance
fees, flow back to the feeder funds to the investors. Recently, the fee structure has been
changing due to pressure from investors. Some of the newer funds are offered with
a fee of 1 or 30, where the manager receives the greater of a 1% management fee or
an incentive fee of 30% of the fund’s alpha or outperformance against a benchmark,
instead of a performance fee based simply on total profits.
    In addition to the partnership agreement that delineates responsibilities, hedge
funds often use side letters to address the specific legal, regulatory, tax, operational,
and reporting requirements of an investor. Such side letters complement and can
occasionally supersede the terms of the fund’s documents and are typically used when
a hedge fund investor requires concessions without changing the private placement
memorandum, the partnership agreement, or the articles. Occasionally, specific rights
are conferred to a particular investor, such as enhanced information rights.
    For larger investors, the hedge fund structure could be a fund of one or a separately
managed account (SMA). These are separate investment accounts over which the
investor retains more influence. In the case of a fund of one structure, the hedge fund
is created for one investor, and in the case of an SMA, the investor creates his or her
own investment vehicle and the underlying assets are held and registered in the name
of the investor. However, the day-to-day management of the account is delegated to the
hedge fund manager. These structures may require additional agreements and service
providers to operate efficiently and seamlessly. Exhibit 3 shows a typical structure.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
162   Learning Module 6                                                                                                      Hedge Funds



                            Exhibit 3: Separately Managed Hedge Fund Investment Account

                                                                                                  Third Party Service Providers
                                                                                                  • Prime Broker
                                            Investment Management Agreement                       • Custodian
                                                                                                  • Accounting and
                                   Hedge Fund Manager                                                Administration
                                                                                                  • Legal, Tax, and Compliance
                                • Investment Philosophy
                                • Investment Process
                                • Governance




                                                                                                                             en t
                                • Trading and Operations




                                                                                                                             m
                                                                              Managed Account




                                                                                                                        gree
                                • Monitoring and Reporting




                                                                                                                      ice A
                                                                          Segregated portfolio
                                                                          managed in investor’s




                                                                                                                     S erv
                                                                          name




                                                                                   Investor
                                                        Ass




                                                                              • Asset Control
                                                         et O




                                                                              • Governance
                                                          wn
                                                              ers




                                                                              • Monitoring
                                                                hip




                                                                              • Risk Management



                             Source: KPMG. https://​assets​.kpmg/​content/​dam/​kpmg/​pdf/​2015/​09/​hedge​-fund​-managed​-accounts​
                             .pdf.




                          An SMA structure allows for a customizable portfolio, with investor-specific invest-
                          ment mandates, better transparency, efficient capital allocation, and higher liquidity,
                          over which the investor can exercise enhanced control while keeping the fees lower.
                          However, SMAs are operationally more complex and also demand greater governance
                          oversight. That is why these accounts are more appropriate for larger, institutional
                          investors.
                              An SMA structure has some downsides as well. Unlike a commingled fund, the
                          managers do not have a stake in the fund investments. The investors negotiate lower
                          fees and fund expenses but in return, may receive allocations only to the fund man-
                          ager’s most liquid investment trades. Hence, the overall motivation of the managers
                          for investment performance could be reduced. Structuring in favor of incentive fees
                          can mitigate this problem.


                          Indirect Hedge Fund Investment Forms
                          Indirect investment in hedge funds aims to make hedge fund exposures more accessible
                          to smaller institutional and larger retail investors or to those who may lack special-
                          ized skills in managing certain asset types or want to create multiple and concurrent
                          exposures to different strategies. The choice of indirect exposure is often motivated
                          by reducing management costs, increasing performance transparency, and improving
                          liquidity. Often the choice is the fund-of-hedge-funds approach, which is a managed
                          portfolio of hedge funds.
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Hedge Fund Investment Forms                                                                 163


    Funds of hedge funds pool funds from investors and invest the proceeds in a
diversified portfolio of hedge fund investments across a variety of hedge funds. This
approach provides direct diversification benefits across fund strategies, investment
regions, and management styles. These funds offer generally lower investment mini-
mums, reduced lockup periods, and typically better exit liquidity.
    For the investor, all this comes with a higher fee structure—often an additional
1%—because the manager of the fund of funds adds its own fees on top of the hedge
fund management fees. Fund-of-funds investors often face a 10% incentive fee in
addition to those fees charged by underlying hedge funds. The incentive fee is typi-
cally calculated on profits net of management fees at both the hedge fund level and
the fund-of-funds level. This raises the cost for the investors, but at the same time,
they gain access to hedge funds in which they otherwise would not have been able
to invest in a diversified pool of funds. Fee layering reduces the end investor’s initial
gross investment returns and may result in an investor paying fees more than once for
management of the same assets. Despite the additional fees, investors choose funds
of funds since they provide an opportunity to invest in an underlying hedge fund that
might be closed to new investors otherwise. Greater liquidity in funds of funds may
result in weaker performance due to fund redemptions in times of market turmoil.
    The fund-of-hedge-fund managers must have expertise in conducting hedge fund
due diligence, must monitor both absolute and relative performance, and are often
able to negotiate better redemption or fee terms than individual investors can.

EXAMPLE 3

   Tenderledge Investments LLC—Comparing strategies
   Tenderledge Investments, a fund-of-funds hedge fund, is benchmarking the
   performance of various hedge fund strategies as measured by the annual strat-
   egy returns over a 10-year period. Focusing on the correlation between various
   hedge fund strategies, the highest correlation between fund-of-funds returns is
   with fundamental growth, and the lowest is with short-bias funds.
                                            ​




         Correlation between Annual Returns               Fund of Funds

         Fundamental Growth                                    0.91
         Convertible Arbitrage                                 0.89
         Distressed/Restructuring                              0.84
         Multi-Strategy                                        0.83
         Credit                                                0.74
         Equity Market Neutral                                 –0.02
         Macro/CTA                                             –0.16
         Short Bias                                            –0.84
                                            ​




   An increasing number of exchange-traded products, such as ETFs, seek to replicate
hedge fund investment styles without directly investing in hedge funds themselves.
Exhibit 4 shows where these investments are on the liquidity spectrum.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
164   Learning Module 6                                                                                                                               Hedge Funds



                            Exhibit 4: Liquidity Spectrum of Various Investment Alternatives




                                                                                                        ts
                                                                                                   un
                                                                                              cco                                                     ds
                                                                       s                e  dA                                                     Fun
                                                                    ip                g                     s                                  ed
                                                                rsh                na                    nd                                 d
                                                            ne                   Ma                    Fu                ds             -tra
                                                        Part             t ely                -e  nd                lFun            nge
                                                   ited              ara                  sed                   tua              ha
                                                im                ep                  lo                     u                xc
                                             • L               • S                • C                   • M                • E
                             Least Liquid                                                                                                       Most Liquid




                          These funds can deliver returns similar to many popular hedge fund strategies, such
                          as long/short equity, market neutral, and event driven, through indexing or active
                          management using liquid assets. Effectively, hedge fund replication ETFs seek to
                          generate returns with high correlations with actual hedge fund returns. By relying on
                          quantitative tools, they imitate a broad spectrum of hedge fund returns or a specific
                          style return. However, the returns from these strategies often fall short compared to
                          pure hedge fund strategies because these instruments are publicly traded, are subject
                          to a much heavier regulatory burden, do not impose restrictions on redemptions, and
                          cannot use leverage to the same level. Yet, these investments benefit from greater
                          liquidity, lower fees, and increased transparency than comparable hedge fund or
                          fund-of-funds strategies and seek to match the monthly returns of hedge fund indexes,
                          as in the following example.

                           EXAMPLE 4

                             Tenderledge Investments LLC—Creating a Hedge Fund
                             ETF
                             Tenderledge is in the process of developing a hedge fund ETF that would track,
                             before fees and expenses, the performance of a fund-of-hedge-funds strategy
                             index. The strategy index seeks to replicate the risk-adjusted return characteristics
                             of fund of hedge funds and underlying multiple hedge fund investment styles—
                             more specifically, long/short equity, market neutral, event driven, fixed-income
                             arbitrage, and distressed situations.
                                 Although Tenderledge is a fund of hedge funds, the ETF will not invest in
                             any hedge funds but, rather, incorporates Tenderledge’s experience and knowl-
                             edge in selecting hedge fund investments for the incorporation of its flagship
                             fund of funds. Tenderledge will use quantitative tools to select traded debt and
                             equity instruments, as well as certain derivatives, to replicate the performance
                             of these five hedge fund strategies.
                                 This ETF intends to achieve portfolio diversification by tracking the per-
                             formance of the hedge fund universe and the five styles it seeks to replicate,
                             generating returns with high correlation with these strategies over the long-
                             term. Moreover, by combining these distinct strategies, the ETF will reduce its
                             exposures to traditional sources of risk, such as interest rate volatility and equity
                             market risk factors, such as beta.
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Hedge Fund Investment Forms                                                             165




QUESTION SET


  1. Choose the correct statements regarding benefits of a master feeder
     structure.

     A. It allows investors in taxable jurisdictions to invest in an offshore hedge
     fund without any tax liability.

     B. Pooling funds from offshore and onshore funds creates economies of
     scale.

     C. This structure allows hedge funds to accept funding from global investors
     with relative ease.

     D. Many regional regulatory requirements can be avoided by such a
     structure.
     Solution:
     B, C, and D are correct. A is incorrect because investors in taxable jurisdic-
     tions do not avoid taxes by investing in offshore funds.

  2. Which of the following statements about SMAs is least accurate?
      A. SMAs are a preferred choice of high-net-worth investors with specific
         investment mandates because they are highly customizable.
      B. SMAs provide better transparency for the investor than other fund
         structures.
      C. SMAs are characterized by simpler fee structures compared to mutual
         funds.
      D. The potential for conflicts of interest exists for SMAs since managers
         are not personally invested in the funds and the regulation require-
         ments are light.
     Solution:
     C is correct because it is the least accurate statement. Mutual fund fees are
     clearly disclosed in the fund prospectus. The SMA fees are negotiated with
     the manager for each account and require sufficient care to structure in a
     way to incentivize the manager. A, B, and D are accurate statements.

  3. Which of the following is least likely an investor objective that would help
     inform the choice of a specific fund structure?
      A. Reduce tax leakage and enhance returns by efficient tax planning
      B. Ensure an appropriate amount of investor control on companies and
         strategies
      C. Maximize the net returns on the investments
      D. Reduce the regulatory and compliance requirements
     Solution:
     C is correct because it is the least likely investor objective. The objective of
     the investment manager is to maximize the returns, while the objective of
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
166   Learning Module 6                                                                                Hedge Funds


                                the structure is to ensure that the other options (Choices A, B, and D) are
                                taken care of.

                             4. Identify the investment structure most appropriate for the investor.

                                A. Managed futures

                                B. SMA

                                C. Fund of funds
                                                                          ​




                              1. A high-net-worth investor who
                              requires tax-efficient investment chan-
                              nels with a high degree of control over
                              allocation decisions
                              2. An institutional investor intending to
                              invest in commodity markets
                              3. A small investor who would like
                              hedge fund exposure at a lower risk
                                                                          ​




                                Solution:
                                                                          ​




                              1. A high-net-worth investor who                B. SMA
                              requires tax-efficient investment chan-
                              nels with a high degree of control over
                              allocation decisions
                              2. An institutional investor intending to       A. Managed futures
                              invest in commodity markets
                              3. A small investor who would like              C. Fund of funds
                              hedge fund exposure at a lower risk
                                                                          ​




                                Choice A: Managed futures funds are also known as commodity trading
                                advisers because they historically focused on commodity futures. However,
                                CTAs may include investments in a variety of futures, including commodi-
                                ties, equities, fixed income, and foreign exchange.
                                Choice B: An SMA structure allows a customizable portfolio, with inves-
                                tor-specific investment mandates, better transparency, efficient capital allo-
                                cation, and higher liquidity, over which the investor can exercise enhanced
                                control while keeping fees lower. However, SMAs are operationally more
                                complex and also demand greater governance oversight. That is why these
                                accounts are more appropriate for larger investors.
                                Choice C: Funds of funds allow smaller investors to make investments in
                                hedge funds for which the minimum investment and research requirements
                                would otherwise be overly burdensome. Volatility is generally low in these
                                offerings because the fund-of-funds manager invests in many different
                                hedge funds.
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Hedge Fund Investment Risk, Return, and Diversification                                                                    167



HEDGE FUND INVESTMENT RISK, RETURN, AND
DIVERSIFICATION                                                                                                        4
                    analyze sources of risk, return, and diversification among hedge fund
                    investments

Hedge fund portfolios approach return generation differently from traditional port-
folios, as Exhibit 5 shows. The most significant difference is that hedge funds seek
to limit market exposure and returns from beta and primarily focus on generating
idiosyncratic returns by identifying sources of unique return, or alpha. The primary
source of hedge fund excess return is market inefficiencies (which may be short lived)
and the skills of the manager in leveraging them.



  Exhibit 5: Comparing Traditional and Hedge Fund Portfolio Sources of
  Return


          Sources of Return                                                             Approach
  Alpha




          Idiosyncratic                                         Hedge Fund Strategies   Emphasize idiosyncratic
          Business risk, operational                                                    risk
          risk, other company-
          specific risks


          Sector/Style                                                                  Diversify sector/style risks
          Industry risk, market-cap,
          growth/value, liquidity
          and sovereign risk


          Market                                                                        Mitigate market risks
          Equity market movement,      Traditional Strategies
          interest rates, foreign
          currency, other macro
  Beta




          factors




Some specific sources of alpha are the manager skills in specific stock selection and
utilizing higher-return strategies that minimize risks. The performance of hedge funds
can be attributed to three distinct sources:
     ■    Market beta—the broad market beta that can be realized using market
          index–based funds/ETFs
     ■    Strategy beta—the beta attributed to the investment strategy of the hedge
          fund applied across the broad market
     ■    Alpha—the manager-specific returns, due to the selection of specific
          positions
    The managers can realize the strategy beta and alpha returns due to their skills in
identifying mis-priced securities and sectors, correctly timing the market, and uti-
lizing operational control on the company business model, as well as using leverage
to amplify the results.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
168   Learning Module 6                                                                              Hedge Funds


                              This does not suggest that the traditional asset pricing models are incorrect.
                          They operate within a set of assumptions—not the least of which is that the markets
                          are efficient. The returns from hedge funds are due to systematic and idiosyncratic
                          alternative risk factors not considered by the model.
                              Typically, investors do not realize the full returns from the hedge fund. Hedge
                          funds are characterized by higher fees, which reduce the alpha generated by them.
                          Some underperforming hedge funds that close out for performance issues face another
                          problem. The capital redeemed from liquidated positions may result in a lower payout,
                          effectively diminishing the total return from the fund.
                              To compare the risk-adjusted return characteristics of individual hedge funds and
                          aggregate hedge fund strategies, we use hedge fund indexes that are created using
                          publicly available hedge fund performance data. There are several vendors that create
                          such indexes, and each index has its own features, but there are some general con-
                          siderations around these indexes that distinguish them from other indexes used for
                          performance comparison. Most hedge fund indexes are based on information reported
                          by the hedge fund managers and others who receive performance information with
                          the right to share that information. It should also be noted that the reporting by any
                          hedge fund is voluntary. This situation introduces several sources of bias and suggests
                          that hedge fund performance is likely overestimated.
                              Selection bias can be an issue. Individual funds are allocated to strategy peer
                          groups in an inconsistent manner: sometimes based on the prospectus, sometimes
                          based on historical style analysis, sometimes using a combination of approaches, each
                          of which adds and compounds bias. Indexes may also have inconsistent sources of the
                          underlying data. A handful of these indexes operate with transparent and constant
                          inclusion, selection, and exclusion of individual managers and/or their funds. Some
                          index providers impose requirements on AUM, vintage, and whether the hedge fund
                          is open to new investors.
                              Survivorship bias can also be an issue. When funds that have stopped reporting
                          are removed from the index, the index will likely show better performance. This
                          effect can be mitigated by including the returns of funds of funds that are active and
                          those that have stopped reporting. For instance, a hedge fund manager consistently
                          underperforming a peer group may have limited incentives to continue to highlight
                          underperformance, particularly if the manager is actively sourcing new investors or
                          launching new funds. Hence, the manager may discontinue reporting poor perfor-
                          mance, which overestimates reported performance.
                              Additionally, hedge funds that are closed to new investors or closed because of
                          underperformance are treated equally. Their performance is excluded from the index
                          value. Additionally, the hedge fund performance data are published with a delay, nor-
                          mally a time lag of four weeks or one month. Since these indexes are non-investable
                          and illiquid, replicating their performance may be difficult.
                              In addition, backfill bias can be an issue. When a successful fund starts reporting
                          performance for the first time, it is very likely that its past performance was stellar,
                          since typically only hedge funds with favorable returns are reported. When such funds
                          are added to an index, the benchmarks will overstate the actual performance. This is
                          a variation of the survivorship bias that results when a new hedge fund is included
                          in a given index and its past performance is “backfilled” into the index’s database.
                          Typically, larger indexes have less backfill bias.
                              A large majority of hedge fund indexes are not weighted by assets under manage-
                          ment. In these hedge fund indexes, each hedge fund receives an equal index weighting
                          in the performance peer group. As a result, comparison of large and small funds can
                          be skewed compared to the performance of a size-weighted index.
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Hedge Fund Investment Risk, Return, and Diversification                                      169



Hedge Fund Investment Risks and Returns
Many traditional investment funds, such as long-only mutual funds and index ETFs,
diversify away much of the idiosyncratic risks in their holdings by investing in a
large number of stocks and achieve most of their returns primarily by bearing the
systematic market risk (beta). Unlike in traditional funds, hedge funds use a variety
of instruments across asset classes and techniques in seeking to generate absolute
returns in all market environments.
    The structure of a hedge fund complicates the benchmarking of the returns on
a frequent basis. Due to the high degree of flexibility the managers have over the
investments and the minimal level of disclosure (as well as the frequency of disclosure)
they offer, it is hard to conduct any performance attribution analysis. Additionally,
the relative illiquidity of investments held by the funds makes marking to market a
problematic and potentially futile process.
    Hence, attributing the sources of returns and risks is a composite process that is
further complicated by the complexity of the strategies and compounded using var-
ious sources of leverage. That is why risk and return comparisons are typically made
to fund-of-funds composite indexes to minimize return distortions. That approach
controls for the effects of self-reporting and selection biases. Furthermore, it ensures
that the fund-of-funds benchmark index is investable.
    Nonetheless, over the long term (since 1990), hedge funds have enjoyed higher
returns (at least prior to fees and expenses) than either stocks or bonds and a standard
deviation nearly identical to that of bonds. Specifically, Exhibit 6 compares the returns,
risk, and performance measures for the HFRI Fund of Funds Composite Index, the
MSCI ACWI Index, and the Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Index. The HFRI
Fund of Funds Composite Index is an equally weighted performance index of funds
of hedge funds included in the HFR Database.
    As mentioned earlier, hedge fund indexes typically build on data that each hedge
fund reports. Because these data are self-reported, there is a degree of survivorship
bias that the HFRI Fund of Funds Composite Index mitigates by reflecting the actual
performance of portfolios of hedge funds. The measures shown here may reflect a
lower reported return because of the added layer of fees, but they likely represent a
fairer, more conservative, and more accurate estimate of average hedge fund perfor-
mance than HFR’s composite index of individual funds. The returns are likely biased
toward equity long/short funds since these are frequently a substantial portion of
funds of funds’ allocation mix. There are also other hedge fund indexes, allowing a
more thorough analysis of the source of returns.
    As shown in Exhibit 6, over the 25-year period between 1990 and 2014, hedge
funds had higher returns than either stocks or bonds and a standard deviation almost
identical to that of bonds. This, however, depends on the benchmarks used, which
typically are broad market benchmarks. In the 1990- 2014 period, hedge funds had
modest overall correlation with global stock returns (0.56) and negligible correlation
with global bond returns (0.07) over this 25-year period. Hedge funds certainly offered
added value to institutional investors as a portfolio diversification agent in this time
period.



  Exhibit 6: Historical Risk–Return Characteristics of Hedge Funds and Other
  Investments, 1990–2019

                                    FoF           Global Stocks        Global Bonds

Annualized return
1990–2014                              7.2%                    6.9%                6.3%
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
170   Learning Module 6                                                                                         Hedge Funds



                                                                   FoF            Global Stocks           Global Bonds
                          2015–2019                                   2.48%                     10.41%                 2.42%
                          Annualized volatility
                          1990-2014                                   6.0%                      16.5%                  5.8%
                          2015–2019                                   1.08%                     11.42%                 1.33%
                          FoF correlation (avg. monthly)
                          1990–2014                                                              0.56                  0.07
                          2015–2019                                                              0.86                  0.03
                          Percentage of positive months             69.3%                       61.3%                 62.7%
                          Best month                                  6.8%                      11.9%                  6.2%
                          Worst month                               −7.5%                     −19.8%                  −3.8%
                          Worst drawdown                           −22.2%                     −54.6%                −10.1%

                          Sources: Fund-of-funds (FoF) data are from the HFRI Fund of Funds Composite Index; global stock data
                          are from the MSCI ACWI Index; global bond data are from the Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate
                          Index.

                          Notably, Exhibit 6 shows that for the subsequent five-year period between 2015 and
                          2019, the absolute return of funds of funds relative, in particular, to global equities has
                          declined, while their performance correlation with equity markets actually increased.
                          This trend has made hedge fund allocations arguably less useful and also somewhat
                          less popular. But some allocators have continued to find value to maintain or actually
                          increase their allocation to a mix of hedge funds as a bond market substitute in their
                          overall portfolio building.
                              Looking at the performance of various hedge fund strategies over time, an approach
                          is to examine the relationship between hedge fund returns and the risk measured by
                          the standard deviation of returns. Exhibit 7 shows the log returns and standard devi-
                          ation of returns for selected hedge fund strategies on an annualized monthly basis as
                          reported by Hedge Fund Research. The data cover the period from January 2008 to
                          November 2021, a period of almost 14 years.
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Hedge Fund Investment Risk, Return, and Diversification                                                                                              171



  Exhibit 7: Return and Risk of Selected Hedge Fund Strategies, 2008–2021
  STANDARD DEVIATION OF ANNUALIZED MONTHLY LOG RETURN

                                                                                               8%

                                                          Short Bias
                                                                                               7%                 MSCI ACWI
                                                                                                                  Index
                                                                                               6%                 S&P 500 Index
                                                                       Convertible Arbitrage

                                                                                               5%
                                                                                                     Fundamental Growth
                                                                                               4%

                                                                                                                                Distressed/
                                                                                               3%
                                                                                  Macro/CTA                                     Restructuring
                                                                                                                  Credit
                                                                                               2%                          Bloomberg Barclays
                                                                                                                           Global Aggregate
                                                                             Equity Market Neutral
                                                                                                                           Index
                                                                                              1%
                                                                                                     Macro
                                                                                                               Multi-strategy

                                               –6%      –5%   –4%      –3%    –2%      –1%      0%   1%      2%     3%        4%       5%       6%
                                                                         AVERAGE OF ANNUALIZED MONTHLY LOG RETURN
     Source: Hedge Fund Research (HFR), annualized monthly log returns.




Some of the hedge fund strategies generated negative returns on average. Short-bias
strategies underperformed all the other strategies in terms of both return and risk
measured by standard deviation. For comparison, the S&P 500, MSCI ACWI, and
Bloomberg Barclays Global Aggregate Index returns are also plotted to show that
many strategies have widely varying risk/return characteristics compared to common
equity and fixed income benchmarks.
    Another approach to analyze the benefits from investing in hedge funds looks at
the risk/return trade-off measured by the coefficient of variation of annual hedge fund
returns. The coefficient of variation can be thought as the price of return in terms of
risk or the relative return adjusted for risk: A higher coefficient of variation provides
greater return for the same amount of risk.


Diversification Benefits of Hedge Fund Investments
The original hedge fund strategy was a market-neutral strategy in which the long
and short positions made the portfolio beta neutral and generated a positive alpha.
Stated differently, hedge funds initially kept their portfolios’ net market sensitivity
exposure to the market benchmark index at zero. By holding long and short positions,
they sought to create value for their investors with minimal exposure to the market.
    Over time, hedge fund investments have evolved from these equity hedge strategies
with little or no equity market correlation to complex strategies across various asset
classes. While hedge fund strategies vary widely, market-neutral, relative value, and
event-driven strategies tend to outperform equity markets during market downturns
and when individual stock correlations fall and tend to have weaker performance
when correlations are high (reducing relative value opportunities) and equities move
uniformly higher.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
172   Learning Module 6                                                                                      Hedge Funds


                              The diversification benefits of hedge funds first came to prominence with the
                          dot-com bubble unwinding in 2000–2002, when they generally performed well com-
                          pared with traditional long-only investment products. Starting with funds of funds,
                          institutional investors increased their hedge fund exposure and then expanded it
                          through direct allocations following the 2008 financial crash. Seeking better diversifi-
                          cation and risk mitigation, despite high hedge fund fees, the investors sought absolute
                          and uncorrelated risk-adjusted returns rather than outsized upside performance. In
                          the early 2000s, when hedge funds came to prominence, the primary drivers were the
                          absolute excess returns, regardless of market direction. The verification efforts from
                          investors on hedge fund operations were minimal. The 2008 crisis (including Lehman
                          Brothers’ bankruptcy and the Bernie Madoff fraud) brought to light the need for addi-
                          tional due diligence. The correction after the 2008 crisis brought several changes. The
                          inflow from high-quality institutional investors and pension funds increased. Such
                          investors demanded additional transparency and control over the fund’s investment
                          process, fund operations, leverage applied, and managers’ performance. This change
                          has benefited only the highest-quality funds, and most other hedge funds failed to keep
                          pace with the positive equity and bond market advances of 2009–2019. They continue
                          to have a place in institutional asset allocations because of their risk-diversification
                          properties.
                              Exhibit 8 shows return relationships between hedge funds and US stock and bond
                          indexes from 2001 to 2021. Although diversification is typically used to reduce idio-
                          syncratic risk, diversification using hedge fund investments seeks to add idiosyncratic
                          outperformance.
                              While hedge fund risk diversification benefits can merit investigation, experience
                          also reflects that their prospective advantage can vary over time. Investors need to be
                          thorough in conducting due diligence when selecting a hedge fund manager. Hedge
                          fund performance has a very low correlation with that of traditional asset classes,
                          such as investment bonds and currencies/cash. For traditional investors in these asset
                          classes, hedge funds provide an enhanced opportunity for portfolio diversification
                          and for generating consistent returns over time. Adding hedge funds to a traditional
                          60/40 portfolio typically decreases the total portfolio standard deviation and increases
                          the Sharpe ratio, thus enhancing portfolio diversification and risk-adjusted return.



                            Exhibit 8: Historical Hedge Fund Monthly Return Correlations, 2001–2021

                                                                                                          Investment-
                                                                 Hedge Funds           S&P 500            Grade Bonds

                          Hedge Funds                                  1                  0.82                 0.10
                          S&P 500                                                          1                  −0.06
                          Investment-Grade Bonds                                                                1

                          Notes: Hedge funds = Dow Jones Credit Suisse Hedge Fund Index. Investment-grade bonds = Bloomberg
                          Barclays US Aggregate Bond Index.

                          As Exhibit 8 shows, hedge funds have a fairly high correlation with equities and a low
                          correlation with investment-grade bonds.

                           QUESTION SET


                             1. Selecting investment trades with high idiosyncratic risk is most
                                likely associated with the management of which type of fund?
                                 A. Equity index ETF
                    © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Hedge Fund Investment Risk, Return, and Diversification                               173


      B. Long-only equity mutual fund
      C. Long/short equity hedge fund
     Solution:
     C is correct. Long/short equity hedge funds are the most likely type of funds
     to seek out trades with high idiosyncratic risk, so their performance is driv-
     en primarily by stock selection and less by other factors, such as sector and
     market exposures. B is incorrect because long-only mutual funds are more
     likely to seek returns from market risk and sector risks with less emphasis
     on undiversifiable, security-specific risks. A is incorrect because equity
     index funds do not seek out idiosyncratic risk and simply try to mimic the
     performance of an index.

  2. Hedge funds are not obligated to report their performance to the public.
     Many do, however, to attract additional investors. Hedge fund benchmarks
     and indexes are created using the reported data. Which of the following is
     least likely a bias that hedge fund investors should be aware of when evaluat-
     ing the performance of hedge fund benchmarks and indexes?
      A. Survivorship bias: Unsuccessful and liquidated hedge funds are
         removed from an index, resulting in their underperformance not being
         accounted for in the index.
      B. Self-reporting bias: Hedge funds have the freedom to not report their
         performance, and only the ones that report are included in an index.
      C. Societal bias: This relates to the perception of hedge funds at a societal
         level, where hedge funds that are perceived to be high performing are
         included in the index.
     Solution:
     C is correct. Societal bias is not one of the biases that hedge fund investors
     need to be aware of when evaluating hedge fund performance. A and B are
     biases that distort the performance of hedge fund benchmarks and indexes.

  3. An investor wants to invest in a diversified hedge fund that minimizes the
     return correlation with the traditional asset classes but would prefer the
     fund to be more liquid and transparent while minimizing the leverage ob-
     tained by borrowing or shorting. What would be the most appropriate hedge
     fund the investor can choose?
      A. Fundamental value
      B. Managed futures
      C. Multi-strategy
      D. Fund of funds
     Solution:
     B is correct. Managed futures have, historically, exhibited low correlation
     with traditional assets and invest in active futures in liquid commodities and
     foreign exchange markets. They are also able to increase exposure without
     resorting to borrowing or shorting.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
174   Learning Module 6                                                                              Hedge Funds




                             PRACTICE PROBLEMS
                          1. Choose the false statement about hedge funds:
                              A. While traditional fund managers charge mainly a management fee, hedge
                                 fund managers charge both a management fee and a performance-based
                                 incentive fee.

                              B. Redemption of funds from a hedge fund prior to its liquidation is very hard,
                                 due to the initial lockup period and specific terms of redemption.

                              C. Individual retail investors cannot invest in hedge funds, and only institu-
                                 tional investors can.

                          2. A fundamental long/short hedge fund manager is evaluating specific securities to
                             build a portfolio’s positions. Which of the following is the strategy the manager
                             would least likely adopt?
                              A. Long securities that have an upside potential relative to current price

                              B. Short sectors with macro trends negatively impacting the company

                              C. Long securities that trade at a significant discount, expecting an increased
                                 valuation in case of a bankruptcy

                          3. Which of the following fund structures is most likely to be suitable for an institu-
                             tional hedge fund investor that seeks a highly customizable offering with negotia-
                             ble fees?
                              A. Separately managed hedge funds

                              B. Commingled hedge funds (master feeder funds)

                              C. Mutual funds

                              D. Funds of funds

                          4. Which of the following parties is responsible for the portfolio management of a
                             fund of hedge funds?
                              A. Accredited investor

                              B. General partner

                              C. Limited partner

                          5. Which of the following best explains why it is unlikely a poor-performing hedge
                             fund would be added to an index?
                              A. Survivorship bias

                              B. Backfill bias

                              C. Selection bias

                          6. The strategy that identifies opportunities for future merger, bankruptcy, or
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Practice Problems                                                                       175


   spin-offs and seeks profit from pricing inefficiencies is known as:
   A. event driven.

   B. relative value.

   C. opportunistic.

7. A money manager was reviewing the automobile sector and identified that the
   stock of General Motors (GM) is relatively overvalued compared to Ford. A
   money manager purchases 100 shares of Ford and shorts 150 shares of GM. It
   turned out that the manager’s perception was right. At the end of the quarter, she
   unwinds both positions, making a profit on both positions. What is this strategy
   called?
   A. Equity long/short

   B. Event driven

   C. Relative value
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
176   Learning Module 6                                                                               Hedge Funds




                             SOLUTIONS
                          1. C is correct because it is a false statement. Accredited retail investors can invest
                             in various types of hedge funds. A and B are true.

                          2. C is correct. Participating in a potential bankruptcy situation would be charac-
                             teristic of an event-driven hedge fund manager and not a fundamental long/short
                             manager. B is incorrect because a fundamental long/short manager would invest
                             in securities expected to exhibit high growth and capital appreciation. C is incor-
                             rect because a fundamental long/short manager would short securities in sectors
                             that project negative growth.

                          3. A is correct. A hedge fund SMA can be tailored to a single investor seeking a
                             tailored portfolio with negotiated fees. The other fund structures do not generally
                             offer customization or negotiable fees.

                          4. B is correct. The general partner is responsible for choosing the hedge funds in
                             a fund of hedge funds. A and C are incorrect because they refer to customers or
                             investors in the fund.

                          5. C is correct. Selection bias refers to when the benchmark inclusion criteria cover
                             only those funds that have good performance and hence report their perfor-
                             mance to attract new investors. A is incorrect; survivorship bias is when the
                             benchmark stops including funds that have ceased operations, most likely due to
                             poor performance, and hence does not fully represent the hedge fund universe. B
                             is incorrect; backfill bias occurs when an index retroactively includes the perfor-
                             mance of a fund before it is added to the index.

                          6. A is correct. Event-driven strategies include mergers, bankruptcies, and spin-offs.
                             Relative value strategies (Choice B) seek to profit from a price or return dis-
                             crepancy between securities based on a short-term relationship. Opportunistic
                             strategies (Choice C) use managed futures and macro strategies.

                          7. A is correct. Equity long/short strategies purchase undervalued stocks and sell
                             short overvalued stocks. Event-driven managers (Choice B) participate in such
                             events as mergers and spin-offs. Relative value managers (Choice C) seek to arbi-
                             trage values between related securities.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.




LEARNING MODULE


7
Introduction to Digital Assets
 LEARNING OUTCOMES
  Mastery     The candidate should be able to:

              describe financial applications of distributed ledger technology
              explain investment features of digital assets and contrast them with
              other asset classes
              describe investment forms and vehicles used in digital asset
              investments
              analyze sources of risk, return, and diversification among digital
              asset investments




INTRODUCTION
As introduced in Alternatives Learning Module 1, digital assets are a relatively new
                                                                                             1
investment class that covers assets that can be created, stored, and transmitted elec-
tronically and have associated ownership or use rights. This class includes a wide
variety of digital assets, including cryptocurrencies, tokens, and digital collectables.
Based on the innovative distributed ledger technology (DLT), or blockchain technology,
digital assets utilize advanced encryption techniques that assure the authenticity of
digital assets. While cryptocurrencies have their own blockchains, crypto-tokens are
built on an existing blockchain.
    As with other types of alternative investments, digital assets have characteristics
distinct from traditional investments. Since the advent of Bitcoin in 2009, when it was
a niche concept in the technology world, digital assets have gradually become more
mainstream alternative investments for investors worldwide. We will give an overview
of the common forms of digital asset investments and discuss the key concepts and
pitfalls in this space.
    Despite their special features and technological characteristics, digital assets offer
investors diversification while providing higher expected returns than traditional
investments provide. However, their risks are also higher. We will discuss the sources
of risks in digital assets to provide a better understanding of this evolving asset class.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
178   Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets




                             LEARNING MODULE OVERVIEW

                                 ■   Blockchain and distributed ledger technology might offer a
                                     new way to store, record, and track digital assets on a secure,
                                     distributed basis. Additionally, DLT could bring efficiencies to post-
                                     trade and compliance processes through automation, smart contracts,
                                     and identity verification.
                                 ■   DLT can take the form of either permissionless or permissioned
                                     networks.
                                 ■   A consensus protocol is a set of rules that govern how blocks are cryp-
                                     tographically chained together in a blockchain network for the verifi-
                                     cation of the complete and immutable history of transaction records.
                                     Two broad types of consensus protocols are “proof of work” (PoW)
                                     and “proof of stake” (PoS).
                                 ■   Digital assets are frequently seen as an alternative asset class. As
                                     digital assets become more developed, institutional investors may
                                     continue to seek some exposure to these assets for their higher returns
                                     and possible diversification benefits.
                                 ■   Digital assets differ from traditional financial assets in terms of
                                     their inherent value, transaction validation approach, uses as a legal
                                     medium of exchange, and legal and regulatory protection.
                                 ■   The most common digital assets are cryptocurrencies, including
                                     Bitcoin and altcoins (including stablecoins and meme coins). There
                                     are also digitalized tokens that include non-fungible tokens, security
                                     tokens, utility tokens, and governance tokens.
                                 ■   Many cryptocurrencies are designed with self-imposed limits on the
                                     total supply through complex computer algorithms. Such limits could
                                     help maintain a value from a technical perspective, yet there is no
                                     economic consensus on how they should be valued. Cryptocurrency
                                     exchanges are classified into centralized exchanges and decentralized
                                     exchanges. Both centralized and decentralized exchanges face prob-
                                     lems with fraud and manipulation because they are not subject to rig-
                                     orous oversight and are generally not regulated as financial exchanges.
                                 ■   Investment in digital assets can take the form of direct ownership
                                     of cryptocurrencies and other digital assets on the blockchains or
                                     indirect investment in exchange-traded products, hedge funds, trusts,
                                     futures, and thematic stocks.
                                 ■   Asset-backed tokens are digital claims on physical assets, financial
                                     assets, or financial instruments and are collateralized by these under-
                                     lying assets.
                                 ■   The push for financial decentralized applications based on open-
                                     source codes and smart contracts has grown into a movement known
                                     as decentralized finance, or DeFi. DeFi seeks to design, combine, and
                                     develop decentralized financial applications as building blocks for
                                     sophisticated financial products and services.
                                 ■   The price of Bitcoin and other digital assets are driven by expectations
                                     on future asset appreciation rather than any underlying cash flow. The
                                     market demand for the limited supply of cryptocurrencies is a signifi-
                                     cant driver of prices.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Introduction                                                                            179


      ■   The performance of the first widely traded digital asset, Bitcoin, has
          been characterized by high return, high volatility, and low correlations
          with traditional asset classes.
      ■   Due to the historically low correlations with other asset classes, digital
          assets offer potential diversification benefits to a well-diversified port-
          folio. But the correlations are observed to have risen, especially during
          periods of high market uncertainty.



LEARNING MODULE SELF-ASSESSMENT

  These initial questions are intended to help you gauge your current level
  of understanding of this learning module.

  1. The consensus protocol on a distributed ledger technology network refers
     to:
      A. the standardized approach that governs how digital assets generated
         from a blockchain network should be valued.
      B. programs embedded in electronic transaction records that are coded
         to self-execute according to predetermined conditions.
      C. the set of rules governing how blocks are cryptographically linked to
         the chain to become immutable on the distributed ledger network.
     Solution:
     The correct answer is C. When transactions enter a node of the distributed
     ledger, they are bundled into “blocks” and cryptographically “chained” to-
     gether to facilitate verification of the prior history. How blocks are chained
     together is determined by the consensus protocol, a set of rules governing
     how blocks can join the chain and become the immutable “truth.” The con-
     sensus protocols are designed to resist attempts at malicious manipulation
     up to a certain level of security.

  2. Cryptocurrencies are a common form of digital asset that:
      A. can be mined only through “proof of work” on blockchain networks.
      B. exist both in physical forms and electronic records with rights to use,
         buy, or sell by owners.
      C. can be used to transfer or store value, which allows time-efficient
         transactions between parties without the need for an intermediary.
     Solution:
     The correct answer is C. Cryptocurrencies are used to transfer or store
     value, which allows near-real-time transactions between parties without the
     need for an intermediary. As electronic mediums of exchange, cryptocur-
     rencies lack physical form and exist only as electronic records on distributed
     ledgers. Depending on the particular consensus protocols used, cryptocur-
     rencies can be generated either by “proof of work” or “proof of stake” by
     miners or validators on networks.

  3. Digital assets differ from traditional financial securities in that:
      A. digital assets are subject to a broader legal protection framework.
      B. digital assets are not valued based on their expected future cash flow.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
180   Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets


                                 C. transaction records of digital assets require a centralized intermediary.
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is B. Most digital assets do not have a fundamental value
                                based on underlying assets or on the potential cash flow or earnings they
                                are expected to generate. To date, the legal and regulatory frameworks for
                                digital assets are still evolving, and there is generally less legal protection
                                compared to traditional financial securities. Digital asset transactions are re-
                                corded on a distributed ledger, and no centralized intermediary is required
                                in the process.

                             4. A special type of cryptocurrency that is backed by and pegged to a fiat cur-
                                rency is called:
                                 A. altcoin.
                                 B. stablecoin.
                                 C. meme coin.
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is B. A stablecoin is designed to maintain a stable value
                                by pegging its value to another asset and is collateralized by a basket of as-
                                sets, typically a fiat currency, precious metals, or other cryptocurrencies.

                             5. An indirect investment in digital assets can be made through:
                                 A. entering into cryptocurrency futures.
                                 B. purchasing Bitcoins on cryptocurrency wallets.
                                 C. participating in the initial coin offering of a new digital token.
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is A. Investors interested in an indirect investment in
                                digital assets can trade cryptocurrency futures on established exchang-
                                es, such as the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. However, the purchase of
                                Bitcoins and buying new tokens through an initial coin offering are direct
                                forms of investment.

                             6. A cryptocurrency ETF seeks to:
                                 A. gain exposure to cryptocurrencies through cash and cryptocurrency
                                    derivatives.
                                 B. replicate digital asset investment returns by investing directly in
                                    cryptocurrencies.
                                 C. gain exposure to the cryptocurrency theme by investing in public
                                    equities related to the digital asset sector.
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is A. A cryptocurrency ETF seeks to replicate digital
                                asset investment returns by cash and cryptocurrency derivatives.

                             7. Bitcoin as an alternative investment has historically exhibited:
                                 A. low return, low risk, and high correlations with traditional assets.
                                 B. high return, high risk, and low correlations with traditional assets.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Distributed Ledger Technology                                                                   181


       C. high return, high risk, and high correlations with traditional assets.
      Solution:
      The correct answer is B. Despite no future cash flow generation, Bitcoin as
      an alternative investment has been characterized by high return, high vola-
      tility, and low correlations with traditional asset classes.

   8. Early investors in cryptocurrencies have enjoyed significant price apprecia-
      tion but many later-stage investors suffered huge losses most likely because:
      A. blockchain technology favors early-stage investors.
      B. there are substantial price fluctuations in cryptocurrencies.
       C. cryptocurrencies have increased their appeal to institutional investors.
      Solution:
      The correct answer is B. Because cryptocurrencies are a relatively new
      innovation, their market is subject to rapid price swings, changes, and un-
      certainty. Their prices have been extremely volatile over the years, and price
      drawdowns were often much more substantial than for traditional asset
      classes. As a result, later-stage investors may suffer huge losses depending
      on their points of entry and exit.




DISTRIBUTED LEDGER TECHNOLOGY
                                                                                            2
              describe financial applications of distributed ledger technology

Distributed ledger technology (DLT) based on a distributed ledger (defined later)
represents a technological development and offers potential improvements to delivering
financing services and financial record keeping. DLT networks are being considered as
a means to create, exchange, and track ownership of financial assets on a peer-to-peer
(P2P) basis. Potential benefits of using this technology include greater accuracy,
transparency, and security in record keeping; faster transfer of ownership; and P2P
interactions. However, the technology is not fully secure, and breaches in privacy and
data protection are possible. Additionally, the computational processes underlying
DLT generally require massive amounts of energy to verify transaction activity.
    A distributed ledger is a type of database that can be shared among potentially
infinite numbers of entities in a network. In a distributed ledger, entries are recorded,
stored, and distributed across a network of participants so that each participating
entity has a matching copy of the digital database, making each copy of the database
a verified record of all current and previous transactions. Basic elements of a DLT
network include a digital ledger, a consensus mechanism used to confirm new entries,
and a participant network.
    The consensus mechanism is the process by which the computer entities (or nodes)
in a network agree on a common state of the ledger. Consensus generally involves
two steps: transaction validation and agreement on ledger update by network parties.
These features enable the creation of records that are, for the most part, considered
immutable, or unchangeable, yet they are transparent and accessible to network
participants on a near-real-time basis. There are various approaches to establishing
consensus.
                                © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
182       Learning Module 7                                                             Introduction to Digital Assets


                                    Features of DLT include the use of cryptography—an algorithmic process to
                                encrypt data, making the data unusable if received by unauthorized parties—which
                                enables a high level of network security and database integrity. For example, DLT
                                uses cryptographic methods of proof to verify network participant identity and for
                                data encryption.
                                    DLT has the potential to accommodate “smart contracts,” which are computer
                                programs that self-execute on the basis of pre-specified terms and conditions agreed
                                to by the parties to a contract. Examples of smart contract use are the automatic exe-
                                cution of contingent claims for derivatives and the instantaneous transfer of collateral
                                in the event of default.
                                    Exhibit 1 illustrates a distributed ledger network in which all participants (nodes)
                                are connected to one another, each having a copy of the distributed ledger. The term
                                “consensus” is shown in the center of the network and represents the consensus
                                mechanism in which the nodes agree on new transactions and ledger updates.



  Exhibit 1: Distributed Ledger Network Setup

                                                                     LEDGER
                                                                81c699a7-b760-4573-
                                                                8e06-3b7e98f5edfd

                     LEDGER                                                                LEDGER
                81c699a7-b760-4573-                                                   81c699a7-b760-4573-
                8e06-3b7e98f5edfd                                                     8e06-3b7e98f5edfd




               LEDGER                                                                            LEDGER
          81c699a7-b760-4573-                       CONSENSUS                               81c699a7-b760-4573-
          8e06-3b7e98f5edfd                                                                 8e06-3b7e98f5edfd



                     LEDGER                                                                LEDGER
                81c699a7-b760-4573-                                                   81c699a7-b760-4573-
                8e06-3b7e98f5edfd                                                     8e06-3b7e98f5edfd

                                                                     LEDGER
                                                                81c699a7-b760-4573-
                                                                8e06-3b7e98f5edfd




                                Blockchain is a type of digital ledger in which information, such as changes in
                                ownership, is recorded sequentially within blocks that are then linked or “chained”
                                together and secured using cryptographic methods. The steps outlining adding a
                                new transaction to the network are outlined in Exhibit 2. There are several key steps
                                a transaction must go through before it is added to the blockchain.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Distributed Ledger Technology                                                                                                183



  Exhibit 2: Adding a Transaction to the Blockchain


                                                 2. A block with transaction
                                                                                            3. Nodes validate the
          1. Transaction takes place                information is created and
                                                                                               transaction details and
             between buyer and seller.              broadcast to the network of
                                                                                               parties to the transaction.
                                                    computers (nodes).




                                                                                            4. Once verified, the
                                                 5. The block of data is then
                                                                                               transaction is combined
          6. Transaction is considered              added or linked (using a
                                                                                               with other transactions to
             complete and ledger has                cryptographic process) to
                                                                                               form a new block (of
             been updated.                          the previous block(s)
                                                                                               predetermined size) of data
                                                    containing trasaction data.
                                                                                               for the ledger.




Each block contains a grouping of transactions (or entries) and a secure link (known
as a hash) to the previous block. New transactions are inserted into the chain only
after validation via a consensus mechanism in which authorized members agree on
the transaction and the preceding order, or history, in which previous transactions
have occurred.


Proof of Work vs. Proof of Stake
Fundamentally, blockchains are software protocols that enable many parties to inter-
act under common assumptions and knowledge without having to trust each other.
When transactions enter into a node of the blockchain, they are bundled into “blocks”
and cryptographically “chained” together to facilitate verification of the prior history.
How blocks are chained together is determined by the consensus protocol, a set of
rules governing how blocks can join the chain and become the immutable “truth.”
The consensus protocols are designed to resist attempts at malicious manipulation
up to a certain level of security. We distinguish between two main types of protocols.

The Proof of Work (PoW) Protocol
The proof of work protocol determines which specific block to add through a compu-
tationally costly lottery. The PoW consensus mechanism used to verify a transaction
involves a cryptographic problem that must be solved by some computers on the
network (known as miners) each time a transaction takes place. Miners use powerful
computers and significant amounts of energy to solve complex algorithm puzzles to
validate and lock blocks of transactions into the blockchain, earning cryptocurrency
for themselves in the process. The “proof of work” consensus process to update the
blockchain can require substantial amounts of computing power, making it very dif-
ficult and extremely expensive for an individual third party to manipulate historical
data. To manipulate historical data, an individual or entity would have to control
most nodes in the network. The success of the network, therefore, relies on broad
network participation.
    Participants on the network agree that the longest chain of blocks is the only
truthful representation of all previous transactions. If a malicious attacker wanted to
make a longer chain including fraudulent transactions, it must outperform the entire
network’s computational power, which theoretically requires most of the network’s
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
184   Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets


                          available computational power. This is the famous 51% attack threshold and serves
                          as the boundary of the PoW protocol’s security standards. Amassing this much net-
                          work power on the most widely used blockchains behind cryptocurrencies, such as
                          Bitcoin or Ethereum, is extremely difficult for any individual, organization, or group
                          of coordinated actors. Even if most of the network’s computational power can be
                          controlled momentarily, the length of block history that can be altered is limited by
                          the duration of this control. This has been the most widely used consensus protocol
                          for digital assets.

                          The Proof of Stake (PoS) Protocol
                          This protocol requires selected participants on the networks, the validators, to pledge
                          capital to vouch for the block's validity. This stake signals to the network that a validator
                          is available to verify the veracity of a transaction and propose a block. A majority of
                          the other validators, who similarly staked a digital asset to the network, must then
                          attest to the validity of proposed block. Validators benefit from both proposing and
                          attesting to the validity of blocks that have been proposed by other participants in a
                          similar staking process. The boundary of the PoS protocol’s security standards builds
                          on a group of stakers (and their pledged stake) controlling the network’s computational
                          power and protecting access from malicious parties gaining a majority.
                              Under both consensus protocols, the validation of the transactions comes with
                          rewards: mining. Successful miners that validate the transaction obtain a new digital
                          asset, whether it is a cryptocurrency or a token. The rate of mining and the speed at
                          which new transactions on the network are validated generally control the amount of
                          a new digital asset that can be created on a specific digital ledger network.


                          Permissioned and Permissionless Networks
                          DLT can take the form of either permissionless or permissioned networks.
                          Permissionless networks are open to any user who wishes to make a transaction,
                          and all users within the network can see all transactions that exist on the blockchain.
                          In a permissionless, or open, DLT system, any network participant can perform all
                          network functions.
                              The main benefit of a permissionless network is that it does not depend on a cen-
                          tralized authority to confirm or deny the validity of transactions, because this takes
                          place through the chosen consensus mechanism. This means no single point of failure
                          exists because all transactions are recorded on a single distributed database and every
                          node stores a copy of the database. Once a transaction has been added to the block-
                          chain, it cannot be changed, barring manipulation; the distributed ledger becomes
                          a permanent and immutable record of all previous transactions. In a permissionless
                          network, trust between transacting parties is not a requirement.
                              Bitcoin is a well-known use of an open permissionless network. Bitcoin was cre-
                          ated in 2009 to serve as the public ledger for all transactions occurring on its virtual
                          currency. Since the introduction of Bitcoin, many more cryptocurrencies, or digital
                          currencies, which use permissionless DLT networks, have been created.
                              In permissioned networks, network members might be restricted from partic-
                          ipating in certain network activities. Controls, or permissions, can be used to allow
                          varying levels of access to the ledger, from adding transactions (e.g., a participant) to
                          viewing transactions only (e.g., a regulator) to viewing selective details of the transac-
                          tions but not the full record. Exhibit 3 compares the salient features of permissioned
                          and permissionless blockchains.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Distributed Ledger Technology                                                                                                   185



  Exhibit 3: Features of Permissioned and Permissionless Blockchains

                            Permissioned blockchain                               Permissionless blockchain

Speed                       Faster as only a limited number of mem-               Slower as a large number of members have
                            bers participate or are authorized to validate        to reach consensus, which decreases network
                            transactions                                          speed and scalability
Cost                        Cost-effective as few members are required to         Not cost-effective as many members are
                            validate each transaction                             required to validate each transaction
Decentralization            Partially decentralized as there are a limited        Decentralized as all members can access the
                            number of members in the chain                        network
Access                      Membership is limited.                                Membership is unlimited.
Governance                  The governance is determined by a centralized         The governance is decentralized and is main-
                            organization.                                         tained by the members.

Based on their decentralized nature, permissionless distributed ledgers are fully open
to all, but that high level of decentralization usually requires more processing power
and bandwidth, making them less cost-effective. The opposite holds true for permis-
sioned blockchains. Governance and transaction verification are two other aspects
that are specific to the type of blockchain.


Types of Digital Assets
Potential applications of DLT to financial services and investment management
include the creation of digital assets, such as cryptocurrencies, and the process to
deliver financial services more efficiently, such as processes tokenization, post-trade
clearing and settlement, and compliance. Exhibit 4 summarizes different digital assets.



  Exhibit 4: Different Digital Assets

                                                                              Other
                                                      Bitcoin           cryptocurrencies


                          Cryptocurrencies           Altcoins                Stablecoins


                                                   Central Bank
                                                 Digital Currencies          Memecoins


        Digital Assets
                                                   Non-Fungible
                                                     Tokens


                                                 Security Tokens
                              Tokens
                                                   Utility Token


                                                   Governance
                                                     Tokens
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
186   Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets


                          Cryptocurrencies
                          Digital assets are assets that exist only as an electronic record with rights to use, buy, or
                          sell. They can be securities, currencies, properties, or commodities. The most common
                          digital assets are units used to transfer or store value, referred to as cryptocurrency
                          and digital currency, which allow near-real-time transactions between parties without
                          the need for an intermediary.
                               As electronic mediums of exchange, cryptocurrencies lack physical form and are
                          issued privately by individuals, companies, and other organizations. Hence, they do
                          not benefit from the backing of a central bank or a monetary authority. Most issued
                          cryptocurrencies utilize open DLT systems in which a decentralized distributed ledger
                          is used to record and verify all digital currency transactions. Several different types
                          of cryptocurrency exist, such as altcoins and stablecoins.
                               Many cryptocurrencies have a self-imposed limit on the total amount of currency
                          they may issue. Although such limits could help maintain their store of value, it is
                          important to note that many cryptocurrencies have experienced high levels of price
                          volatility. There is no consensus on how to value cryptocurrencies, and the apparent
                          lack of clear fundamentals underlying these currencies has contributed to their volatility.
                               Cryptocurrencies are not government backed or regulated. Central banks around
                          the world, however, are recognizing potential benefits and examining use cases for
                          their own cryptocurrency versions as an alternative to physical currency. Such central
                          bank digital currencies (CBDCs) are typically designed as a tokenized version of the
                          currency issued by the central bank (“fiat currency”)—essentially a digital bank note
                          or coin.

                          Tokens
                          Transactions involving physical assets, such as real estate, luxury goods, and com-
                          modities, often require substantial efforts in ownership verification and examination
                          each time a transfer in ownership takes place. Through tokenization, the process
                          of representing ownership rights to physical assets on a blockchain or distributed
                          ledger, DLT has the potential to streamline this process by creating a single, digital
                          record of ownership with which to verify ownership title and authenticity, including
                          all historical activity.
                              Another form of digital assets is the non-fungible token (NFT). An NFT links
                          digital assets to certificates of authenticity using blockchain technology. NFTs differ
                          from “fungible” tokens, such as cryptocurrencies, because each token and the authen-
                          ticated object it represents is unique. As such, they uniquely “stamp” assets and can
                          represent digital assets in a virtual world. The most common use for NFTs is trading
                          in digital artwork.
                              Security tokens digitize the ownership rights associated with publicly traded
                          securities. The custody of these security tokens can be stored on a blockchain, which
                          increases the efficiency of post-trade processing, settlement, record keeping, and
                          custody. Such a single ledger solution would eliminate the need for reconciliation
                          and validation of transactions and allow participants to perform various transactions
                          more easily and with greater transparency.
                              An example of security tokens is initial coin offering (ICO), an unregulated pro-
                          cess whereby companies sell their crypto-tokens to investors in exchange for money
                          or for another agreed upon cryptocurrency. An ICO is typically structured to issue
                          digital tokens to investors that can be used to purchase future products or services
                          being developed by the issuer. ICOs provide an alternative to traditional, regulated
                          capital-raising processes, such as IPOs. Compared to the regulated IPO market, ICOs
                          might have lower associated issuance costs and shorter capital-raising time frames.
                          However, most ICOs do not typically have attached voting rights. Regulation for ICOs
                          is under consideration in several jurisdictions, and numerous instances of investor
                          loss have resulted from fraudulent schemes.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Distributed Ledger Technology                                                           187


    There are also utility tokens that provide services within a network, such as pay
for services and network fees. While security tokens may pay out dividends, utility
tokens only compensate for activities on the network.
    Governance tokens are important in permissionless networks. They serve as votes
to determine how particular networks are run. For instance, when there is a techni-
cal problem on a permissionless blockchain network, it is the owners of governance
tokens who can vote on a solution or any major changes to maintain the stability and
integrity of the network.

QUESTION SET


  1. Which of the following is not a potential benefit of distributed led-
     ger technology?
      A. Facilitation of smart contracts
      B. Energy-efficient way of record keeping
      C. Immutable and secure transaction records
     Solution:
     The correct answer is B. Distributed ledger technology provides greater ac-
     curacy, transparency, and security in record keeping; enables faster transfer
     of ownership; and enables peer-to-peer interactions. A DLT network relies
     on certain consensus mechanisms in which all nodes that are connected on
     the network agree on new transactions and ledger updates. Once verified by
     all the nodes of the network, the transaction ledger is immutable and is kept
     by each of the nodes. However, the transaction validation process requires
     material computational power of all the miners on the network, especially in
     the case of proof-of-work consensus protocol.

  2. Identify the following statement as true or false: Prices of cryptocurrencies
     can be volatile because there are finite limits on the total amount of curren-
     cies that may be issued.
     Solution:
     False. Prices of cryptocurrencies have been volatile because there is no con-
     sensus on how to value cryptocurrencies. The apparent lack of clear funda-
     mentals underlying these currencies has contributed to their volatility.

  3. The process where a node on a blockchain network pledges its digital asset
     to verify a new block’s validity is called:
      A. tokenization.
      B. proof of work.
      C. proof of stake.
     Solution:
     The correct answer is C. This proof-of-stake protocol requires selected
     participants on a blockchain network, the validators, to pledge digital assets
     to vouch for the block’s validity. This stake signals to the network that a val-
     idator is available to verify the veracity of a transaction and propose a block.
     Other validators who stake a digital asset to the network must then attest to
     the validity of proposed block. Validators benefit from both proposing and
     attesting to the validity of blocks that have been proposed by other partici-
     pants in a similar staking process in the form of new digital assets.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
188   Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets


                             4. Identify the various types of digital assets according to their general
                                classifications:
                                                                       ​




                               A. Cryptocurrencies                         1. ICO
                               B. Tokens                                   2. NFT
                                                                           3. CBDC
                                                                           4. Ether
                                                                           5. Stablecoin
                                                                           6. Utility token
                                                                       ​




                                Solution:
                                                                       ​




                               A. Cryptocurrencies                         3. CBDC
                                                                           4. Ether
                                                                           5. Stablecoin
                               B. Tokens                                   1. ICO
                                                                           2. NFT
                                                                           6. Utility token
                                                                       ​




              3           DIGITAL ASSET INVESTMENT FEATURES

                                           explain investment features of digital assets and contrast them with
                                           other asset classes

                          Digital assets have a growing presence in the financial services industry and have
                          become a more prevalent asset class for investors. Most digital assets are crypto-
                          currencies, and their growth has been spectacular. While there were around 70
                          cryptocurrencies recorded in 2013, by early 2022, there were close to 10,000 different
                          cryptocurrencies issued by corporations, organizations, and in many cases, individuals.
                              Cryptocurrency investment is typically viewed as an alternative asset. As digital
                          assets increase in prominence, some institutional investors selectively seek exposure
                          to these assets for their potential higher returns and possible diversification benefits.
                          When institutional investors become more comfortable with investing in digital
                          assets, it may be a very early indication that the market may be close to reaching a
                          tipping point. As more institutional investors are becoming comfortable with the
                          idea of owning digital assets outright, various financial service providers, such as
                          digital exchanges and custodians, have expanded their infrastructure in anticipation
                          to support potential investment in these digital assets.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Digital Asset Investment Features                                                          189



Distinguishing Characteristics of Digital Assets
There are notable differences between digital assets and traditional financial assets.
The main similarity between these asset types is the emergence of indirect investment
vehicles such as exchange-traded funds and hedge funds that invest both in traditional
financial assets and in digital assets. The main differences between these asset types
are as follows:
   ■   Differences in inherent value. Unlike financial assets, most digital assets do
       not have an inherent value based on underlying assets or on the potential
       cash flow—interest and dividends—they can or are expected to generate.
       With no expected earnings to inform today’s value and indicate the likely
       direction for tomorrow’s prices, digital assets do not have a fundamental
       value. They derive their price solely from an anticipated asset appreciation
       from a perceived scarcity value (due to limitations on the total supply of
       currency) and the potential ability to transfer value in the future (due to
       unique features in the underlying algorithms that may facilitate certain types
       of financial transactions).
   ■   Differences in validating transactions. One key difference between digital
       assets and traditional financial instruments is that traditional assets are
       generally recorded in private ledgers maintained by central intermediar-
       ies. The ownership and exchange of digital assets are generally recorded
       on a decentralized digital ledger using cryptography and enhanced algo-
       rithms. Whether a digital asset transaction is validated in a permissionless
       or permissioned network using either a PoS or PoW standard impacts its
       perceived value.
   ■   Differences in the uses as a medium of exchange. Financial assets are tradi-
       tionally priced and traded in widely accepted currencies; they can be readily
       transacted and exchanged into fiat currencies. Fiat currencies form the
       foundation of modern financial systems as the mediums of exchange in any
       country. In contrast, some digital assets—for example, cryptocurrencies,
       such as Bitcoins—are used as direct substitutes of real-world fiat currencies
       in certain circumstances—especially for online transactions in the emerging
       Web3 ecosystem. Web3 is a concept that refers to the third iteration of the
       internet built on blockchain technologies, decentralization, and token-based
       economies.
   ■   While many digital assets, such as digital art and NFTs, are transacted and
       traded using cryptocurrencies, there is only a very limited acceptance of
       digital assets as a medium of exchange in the mainstream financial system
       to date. A reason has been the relative cost of the transactions, which can
       be prohibitively high to meaningfully process a large volume of transactions.
       While cryptocurrencies are being used to pay for certain goods and services
       and as investments, they are not legal tender in most jurisdictions and can-
       not usually be used to legally settle and extinguish debt in the same way as
       fiat currencies. Finally, the use of cryptocurrencies for payment and invest-
       ment purposes is severely restricted in multiple countries; some countries
       have banned its usage outright and digital asset ownership may result in
       criminal conviction. Some governments are exploring the concept of CBDC
       as a tokenized version of fiat currencies, but the jury is still out how the idea
       will evolve.
                                  © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
190         Learning Module 7                                                             Introduction to Digital Assets


                                    EXAMPLE 1

                                      Tesla’s Acceptance of Bitcoin and Dogecoin
                                      A high-profile supporter of cryptocurrencies and tokens has been Elon Musk,
                                      the CEO and major shareholder of Tesla Inc., the electric vehicle automaker. In
                                      February 2021, Tesla announced in a public filing that it has invested USD1.5
                                      billion in Bitcoin to diversify its cash balance (of over USD19 billion at the end
                                      of 2020). It also indicated it would start accepting Bitcoin as a payment method
                                      for its vehicles subject to applicable laws and on a limited basis initially. But in
                                      May 2021, the company announced that it had suspended vehicle purchases
                                      using Bitcoin, citing concerns about increasing use of fossil fuels for Bitcoin
                                      mining and transactions. In July 2021, Musk indicated that Tesla would most
                                      likely restart accepting Bitcoin as payments once it had conducted due dili-
                                      gence on the amount of renewable energy used in Bitcoin mining. It resumed
                                      accepting Bitcoin; in January 2022, Musk announced that Tesla would start
                                      accepting Dogecoin as a payment method for selected brand merchandise. It is
                                      now the only cryptocurrency that Tesla accepts for online payment for certain
                                      Dogecoin-eligible products.
                                           In July 2022, Tesla announced that it had sold off 75% of its Bitcoin holding
                                      as the price had plummeted, but none of its Dogecoin.

                                       ■   Differences in legal and regulatory protection. The rules governing financial
                                           instruments and the trading of financial instruments are clear, predictable,
                                           and well defined across most jurisdictions. Legal and regulatory standards
                                           for traditional financial instruments and assets and trading in these are well
                                           developed and are often comparable across national borders; this is not
                                           the case with digital assets. Comprehensive rules that are specific to digital
                                           assets—their formation, trading, and legal standards—are still being devel-
                                           oped. The unclear, ambiguous framework puts digital assets at a disadvan-
                                           tage. US regulators consider certain digital currencies as commodities, and
                                           other regulators consider them a non-financial asset. With no comprehen-
                                           sive and clear legal recognition—and protection—for digital assets, their
                                           value is highly speculative. Finally, the various exchanges at which digital
                                           currencies are traded are typically not regulated as a traditional financial
                                           exchange. Therefore, certain market behaviors, such as price manipulation
                                           and outright fraud, that are considered to be illegal activities on traditional
                                           financial transactions are not necessarily prohibited on a digital exchange.
                                           Exhibit 5 shows differences between digital and traditional financial assets.



  Exhibit 5: Digital Assets vs. Traditional Financial Assets

                            Digital Assets                                   Traditional Financial Assets

Inherent value              ■   No fundamental value or future cash flow      ■   Value determined by future cash flow gener-
                                generation                                        ated from the assets
                            ■   Price driven by certain features on the
                                blockchain
Transaction validation      ■   Usually recorded on decentralized digital     ■   Recorded in private ledgers maintained by
                                ledgers using cryptography and algorithms         central intermediaries
                                for permissionless blockchain networks
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Digital Asset Investment Features                                                                                                 191



                              Digital Assets                                     Traditional Financial Assets
Uses as a medium of           ■   Very few digital assets are used as a direct   ■   Not used directly as a medium of exchange
exchange                          medium of exchange, mainly targeting large-        but can be readily transacted and exchanged
                                  scale commercially viable acceptance               into traditional fiat currencies that are widely
                                                                                     used in the real world
Legal and regulatory          ■   Ambiguous, often contradictory, evolving       ■   Well-established, tested, and proven legal,
protection                        framework; generally unregulated, with mini-       regulatory, and commercial standards that are
                                  mal legal protections                              clear, predictable, and well defined across all
                              ■   Use can be illegal or criminal in some             jurisdictions
                                  countries




Investible Digital Assets
The rapid growth of digital assets has been remarkable. That several digital assets and
cryptocurrencies exist reflects that their underlying blockchains are designed and
optimized for different purposes. The most popular cryptocurrencies are Bitcoin and
Ether. Bitcoin and Ether together make up over 80% of total cryptocurrency market
value as of July 2022.
     Bitcoin (BTC or XBT) and was launched to secure payments in a P2P network.
It was designed as an alternative to traditional currencies: as a medium of exchange
and store of value. It is the best-known and most widely traded cryptocurrency and
its fundamental design continues to influence the development of new types of digi-
tal assets. Thousands of other cryptocurrencies exist based on technology similar to
Bitcoin: These are called altcoins.

Altcoins
The most prominent altcoin is Ether, launched in 2015 on its own Ethereum network.
Ether involves the added feature of a programmable blockchain that allows users to
construct applications using the blockchain to validate or secure transactions or pay-
ments for markets or other uses. Ether and other programmable coins therefore have the
possibility to be more widely used than simply as a store of value. Such programmable
altcoins are also called smart coins or smart contracts, a self-executing contract with
the salient terms of the contract directly written into the lines of code, which allows
for execution of the contract using the blockchain network. That execution provides
a trackable and irreversible record, subject to immutable verification by the nodes of
the network. Other altcoins include stablecoins and meme coins.

Stablecoins
Stablecoins are designed to maintain a stable value by linking their value to another
asset and are collateralized by a basket of assets, typically legal tender, precious metals,
or other cryptocurrencies. The reserve basket protects the holders from price volatility
and minimizes the risk to the holders of the stablecoin should the cryptocurrency
face transaction problems, including failure. Some stablecoins—smart stablecoins or
algorithmic stablecoins—are designed to use algorithms to control the available supply
of the asset, such as minting additional assets when there is increased demand for
the coin. It is important to note that stablecoins cannot be exchanged for fiat money
and do not have any legal or regulatory backing.
    Stablecoins may potentially facilitate settlement and streamline cross-border
trading, investing, and payments. In recent years, several competing solutions have
been developed to facilitate transactions across various physical and tokenized
financial assets and instruments using the stablecoin concept. A special example is
the asset-backed token, which maintains price parity with some target asset (the
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
192   Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets


                          US dollar or gold) through tokenization and will be covered later in this module. For
                          an investor holding assets in in a cryptographic wallet, asset-backed tokens provide
                          exposure both to assets that are on the chain (cryptocurrencies and digital assets)
                          and off the chain (financial instruments).

                           EXAMPLE 2

                             Market Shakeout of Stablecoins
                             Stablecoins are designed to track the value of real-world conventional fiat
                             currencies and to provide immediate access to liquidity for traders to redeem
                             their digital stablecoins at par with the value of fiat currencies. Some of these
                             stablecoins are collateralized by financial assets, such as a basket of fiat cur-
                             rencies, gold, Treasuries, and other liquid or illiquid assets. Two of the largest
                             stablecoins in terms of collateral, Tether and USD Coins, use this approach and
                             can either be traded freely on the open market or be redeemed for their dollar
                             value from the issuers.
                                  Another popular stablecoin, Terra, was often called an “algorithmic stable-
                             coin.” It was backed not by collateral of financial and physical assets but through
                             an algorithm that sought to keep its value stable.
                                  For instance, TerraUSD was Terra’s stablecoin pegged to the US dollar
                             “algorithmically” instead of the value of the underlying collateral in US dollar
                             reserves. The computer algorithm developed by the issuer of Terra, Terraform
                             Labs, used Luna, a governance token also issued by Terraform Labs, to main-
                             tain the stability of Terra’s value. The relationship between Terra and Luna was
                             designed so that the holders of Terra could always redeem it for a stable value
                             of newly minted Luna coins. If the pricing relationship between Terra and Luna
                             was not in equilibrium, new Luna coins could be issued or existing Luna coins
                             would be destroyed to maintain the value relationship and this algorithmic peg
                             between Terra and Luna. Through financial arbitrage, the stability of Terra’s
                             value by trading between Terra and Luna would be held. Effectively, Terra was
                             simply backed by Luna, both bearing a US dollar value.
                                  In May 2022, this relationship was tested. On 9 May, the price of Luna first
                             began to slide, putting pressure on the Terra’s peg. Many Terra owners rushed
                             to redeem their coins, leading to a sudden surge in supply of newly issued Luna:
                             In just one week, the number of Luna increased from 350 million coins to 6.5
                             trillion. Consequently, the price of Luna collapsed, as did that of Terra.
                                  TerraUSD was finally depegged from the US dollar on 9 May 2022. Though
                             Terra’s co-founder tried to revive Terra in a reincarnated form of TerraClassicUSD,
                             the stablecoin had since lost its credibility. With its appeal diminished, the coin
                             was practically defunct.
                                  The collapse of Terra sparked serious concern over the collateral backing of
                             its largest stablecoin counterparts, Tether and USD Coins, because of the lim-
                             ited transparency of their reserves. A massive run and redemption by nervous
                             holders of these stablecoins soon followed.
                                  While the “securitized” stablecoins, such as Tether, may have survived market
                             turbulence, other “algorithmic” stablecoins may not when their technical flaws
                             are exploited. Likewise, the value of asset-backed tokens depends on both the
                             underlying assets and the prices of the relevant tokens. An example of Tether
                             is shown in Exhibit 6.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Digital Asset Investment Features                                                                                 193


​




     Exhibit 6: Market Price of Tether
​




                                                                                                          1.002


                                                                                                          1.001


                                                                                                          1.00
                                                                                                          70


                                                                                                          0.999


                                                                                                          0.998


                                                                                                          0.997


                                                                                                          0.996
             Oct     Nov    Dec    Jan    Feb    Mar     Apr    May     Jun    Jul      Aug   Sep   Oct
                     2021                                          2022
     Source: Bloomberg




Meme Coins
Meme coins are cryptocurrencies often inspired by a joke and are generally launched
for entertainment purposes as they gain popularity in a short period of time, which
allows early purchasers to sell their holdings at an often considerable profit.

    EXAMPLE 3

     Meme Coins—The History of Dogecoin
     The original and probably most popular meme coin is Dogecoin, which is based
     on the popular “doge” internet meme. Dogecoin, featuring a Shiba Inu dog on
     its logo, was originally founded in 2013 as a mockery of the popularity of cryp-
     tocurrencies, mainly Bitcoin. Even the name “dog” was misspelled as “doge” as
     part of a light-hearted parody.
          While some cryptocurrencies are scarce by design, Dogecoins were inten-
     tionally designed to have no limit in supply. But what started as a joke soon
     gained popularity among fervent followers as a cult symbol, especially after
     social media endorsements by some high-profile business figures. At its peak in
     May 2021, Dogecoin’s market value had jumped to over USD80 billion. However,
     the price and market cap of Dogecoins plummeted as investors and speculators
     dumped these coins because their value seemed hardly justifiable. By May 2022,
     its market dropped to USD11 billion.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
194   Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets




                           QUESTION SET


                             1. The market value of a digital asset is primarily driven by:
                                 A. the future price expectation of speculators.
                                 B. the future earnings generated from the digital assets.
                                 C. the cryptographic algorithm of the blockchain network.
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is A. Unlike financial assets, most digital assets do not
                                have an inherent value based on underlying assets or on the expected cash
                                flow that can be generated. In other words, digital assets do not have a fun-
                                damental economic value. Their prices depend solely on the expected asset
                                appreciation due to the perceived scarcity value and the potential ability to
                                transfer value in the future; however, that value reflects market expectations
                                at the time the transaction takes place.

                             2. Identify the following statement as true or false: The legal protection reg-
                                ulations on securities and commodities are generally applicable to digital
                                assets.
                                Solution:
                                False. Whereas legal and regulatory standards for traditional financial in-
                                struments are well developed, legally tested, and proven; widely and uni-
                                formly enforceable; and often comparable across different jurisdictions and
                                legal systems, comprehensive rules that are specific to digital assets—their
                                formation, trading, and legal standards—are being developed. Additionally,
                                the various digital exchanges on which digital currencies are traded are typi-
                                cally not as heavily regulated as traditional financial markets. Consequently,
                                certain irregular market behaviors, such as price manipulation and outright
                                fraud, are not always prohibited on a digital exchange.

                             3. The ownership and exchange of digital assets on permissionless networks
                                are usually recorded on a:
                                 A. centralized ledger maintained by a central intermediary.
                                 B. decentralized ledger maintained by a central intermediary.
                                 C. decentralized ledger without any central intermediary.
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is C. The ownership and exchange of digital assets on
                                permissionless networks are generally recorded on a distributed (i.e., decen-
                                tralized) digital ledger using cryptography and enhanced algorithms without
                                the use of any central intermediary.

                             4. Compare and contrast the main types of stablecoins.
                                Solution:
                                The traditional type of stablecoin, or “securitized stablecoin,” is backed by
                                physical collateral of fiat currencies, precious metals, or other financial
                                assets as reserves for every stablecoin issued. Each coin can be traded freely
                                on the open market or redeemed for its dollar value from the issuer by liqui-
                                dating the collateral. A special example of the stablecoin is the asset-backed
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Digital Asset Investment Forms                                                                 195


       token, which maintains price parity with some target asset—for example, the
       US dollar or gold—through tokenization.
       Another unique type of stablecoin is called a “smart stablecoin” or an “al-
       gorithmic stablecoin,” because there is no backing of physical assets for the
       cryptocurrency. Rather, its value is backed by another cryptocurrency or
       token and is linked to the US dollar “algorithmically” instead of using actual
       dollar reserves.




DIGITAL ASSET INVESTMENT FORMS
                                                                                           4
               describe investment forms and vehicles used in digital asset
               investments

Investment in digital assets can take the form of direct investment on the blockchain or
indirect investments in exchange-traded products and hedge funds. Direct ownership
of Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies involves the use of a cryptocurrency wallet,
which stores the (public and private) digital codes required to access the asset on a
computer website or mobile device application. Two different types of cryptocurrency
exchanges exist.
   ■    Centralized exchanges are the most popular type of exchange. These pri-
        vately held exchanges provide trading platforms for cryptocurrencies and
        offer volume, liquidity, and price transparency. Although the concept of
        centralized exchanges is incompatible with Bitcoin’s decentralized ideology,
        they are very popular. Trading is electronic and direct, without any inter-
        mediating broker or dealer, and is hosted on private servers, exposing the
        centralized exchanges and their clients to security vulnerabilities. Should
        the exchange’s servers become compromised, the entire system may become
        paralyzed, halting trade, and leaking vital user information—such as cryp-
        tographic keys accessing the custodial wallets leaked. Some exchanges are
        regulated, and depending on jurisdiction, these exchanges may be regulated
        as financial exchanges or other types of financial intermediaries.
   ■    Decentralized exchanges emulate blockchain’s decentralized protocol and
        operate similarly to how Bitcoin operates. Decentralized exchanges lack
        a centralized control mechanism and operate on a distributed platform
        without central coordination or control. This comes with the benefit that
        should one of the computers on the network be attacked, the exchange
        remains operational since there are numerous other computers that con-
        tinue to operate on the network. That is why attacking decentralized
        exchanges is substantially more difficult, rendering such attacks almost
        certain to fail. Decentralized exchanges are difficult to regulate because no
        single individual, organization, or group controls the system. This means
        that those trading on decentralized exchanges are generally free to transact
        without any regulatory scrutiny, allowing for potentially illegal activity.
    Both centralized and decentralized exchanges may face problems with fraud and
manipulation and raise investor-protection concerns because they are not subject to
rigorous oversight. Unlike the exchanges for more traditional assets, such as equity
securities and futures contracts, cryptocurrency and cryptocurrency trading venues
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
196   Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets


                          are largely unregulated, and individuals or groups may engage in fraud or market
                          manipulation (including using social media to promote cryptocurrencies in a way
                          that artificially increases the price of a cryptocurrency).

                           EXAMPLE 4

                             Pump and Dump Schemes of Cryptocurrencies
                             In a typical pump and dump scheme, earlier investors of an asset talk it up to
                             encourage others to buy, pushing the price up. When the price is high enough,
                             the scheme orchestrators quickly realize profits and dump the asset in the
                             market, leaving unknowing investors with often steep trading losses. Given the
                             hype around cryptocurrencies and the unregulated nature of the digital assets,
                             pump and dump schemes are widespread.
                                 EthereumMax (EMAX) is a digital token created on the Ethereum blockchain
                             in May 2021, but it has no other connection to Ethereum. Touted as a “culture
                             coin” that “bridges the gap between community-driven coins and foundational
                             coins,” it was endorsed and heavily promoted by pop celebrities and famous
                             sports stars just a month after it came into being. The price of EMAX rose
                             sharply, with frenzied buying likely fueled by receiving heavy social media
                             exposure. Its ascent was rapid, but its descent was faster: After one month, it
                             had lost almost all its value and the interest in trading in it disappeared. It was
                             then alleged that EMAX was a classic example of the typical pump and dump
                             scheme. Subsequent legal action against the celebrities endorsing and “pumping”
                             EMAX with false and misleading statements alleged that this scheme allowed
                             EMAX executives to dump their holdings of EMAX for substantial profit while
                             leaving other investors with worthless tokens.


                           EXAMPLE 5

                             FTX Bankruptcy
                             FTX, a Bahamas-based cryptocurrency exchange that also owns FTX.US (avail-
                             able to US investors), grew rapidly after its founding in 2019.
                                 As a centralized exchange for spot cryptocurrency and stablecoins, as well as
                             futures, FTX became one of the largest such exchanges. It also provided custodial
                             and transaction services. In 2021, it had 1.2 million users and generated over
                             USD 1 billion in revenue. Like many digital currency exchanges, FTX issues an
                             exchange token (FTT), a form of utility token used on its platform by market
                             participants. As FTT may be borrowed or lent—and grants holders a discount
                             on FTX trading fees—it represents some value (shown in Exhibit 7).
                                 FTX has been funded by several successive rounds of venture capital (VC)
                             investments, raising USD 400 million from VC firms and a major pension fund.
                             In January 2022, FTX was valued at USD 31.6 billion.
                                 FTX was considered to be a relatively stable and trusted alternative among
                             digital currency exchanges. In 2022, declining cryptocurrency prices and rising
                             interest rates created liquidity pressures for FTX and other cryptocurrency
                             market participants.
                                 This growing liquidity stress was compounded by reports that FTX and
                             Alameda Research, a quantitative trading firm controlled by FTX’s founder,
                             held significant collateral assets in illiquid investments, including FTX-related
                             assets. On 2 November 2022, a Coindesk article cited close ties between FTX
                             and Alameda Research and noted that Alameda Research held over a third of its
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Digital Asset Investment Forms                                                                     197


  USD 14.6 billion balance sheet either directly in FTT or as FTT-based collateral.
  This revelation prompted an FTT selloff by investors and customer withdraw-
  als, with the FTT price falling from over USD 25 to around USD 1 in just over
  a week, as Exhibit 7 shows. On 11 November 2022, FTX filed for bankruptcy.
                                                          ​




      Exhibit 7: FTT Digital Token Price (USD), January–November 2022
                                                          ​




        Last Price          1.3070
        High on 03/27/22   52.0191
        Average            32.7153
        Low on 11/14/22     1.3070
                                                                                            50



                                                                                            40



                                                                                            30



                                                                                            20



                                                                                            10


                                                                                            1.30
                                                                                             0

       Jan          Feb         Mar   Apr   May     Jun       Jul   Aug   Sep   Oct   Nov
                                                  2022

  Source: Bloomberg.
     In its bankruptcy filing, FTX listed USD 9 billion in liabilities, with liquid
  investments comprising just USD 900 million of total assets. The number of
  creditors exceeds 100,000.


EXAMPLE 6

  Ponzi Scheme Allegation over Forsage
  A Ponzi scheme is an investment scam that typically involves the distribution of
  high returns to existing investors not from any real investment but from funds
  contributed by new investors. A variant of the Ponzi scheme is the pyramid Ponzi
  scheme, in which each level of schemers lures new investors in by promising
  high returns from investment opportunities that are usually fabricated. The new
  funds then go in to pay back the “returns” one level up. In effect, the “returns”
  earned by the earlier investors at the top are paid for by the cash contribution
  from the different levels of new investors.
      Launched in January 2020, Forsage ran a decentralized blockchain platform
  that purportedly enabled online businesses to transact through smart contracts
  based on Ethereum, Tron, and Binance networks. But in August 2022, the US
  Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) laid charges against 11 individuals,
  including the four founders based in Russia, Georgia, and Indonesia and certain
  US promoters, for investment fraud. The SEC alleged that Forsage operated a
  typical fraudulent crypto pyramid and Ponzi scheme that raised more than
  USD300 million from retail investors worldwide, helped by heavy endorsement
  and marketing by promoters on social media.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
198   Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets



                          Direct Digital Asset Investment Forms
                          Direct investments in digital assets are made on various digital exchanges where the
                          transaction is recorded on the blockchain. Once such a transaction is entered between
                          the parties, it becomes validated on the blockchain and a permanent record of the
                          transaction is created. Most cryptocurrency exchanges are open and available 24/7,
                          which allows for continuous trading.
                              There are several risks with direct investment in cryptocurrencies. First, there is
                          the risk for fraud, which has increased with the popularity of cryptocurrencies. Such
                          fraud comes in many forms and includes scam ICOs, various pump and dump schemes,
                          market manipulation, theft, and schemes that seek to gain access to credentials needed
                          to access cryptocurrency wallet information. Second, since cryptocurrencies are usu-
                          ally held in a wallet that is accessible only using a unique passkey, losing access to the
                          passkey makes the holdings in the wallet irretrievable. Around 20% of all Bitcoins are
                          reportedly in lost or deserted wallets that their owners cannot access.
                              Moreover, many of the smaller cryptocurrencies may be held primarily by a small
                          number of holders, sometimes referred to as “whales.” “Whales” is jargon used by the
                          cryptocurrency community to mean individuals or entities that hold an amount of a
                          cryptocurrency large enough to have the ability to manipulate the price.

                           EXAMPLE 7

                             Cryptocurrency Whales
                             It was reported in mid-2022 that big investors on the Ethereum blockchain were
                             accumulating the newly created meme coin, Shiba Inu (SHIB), a close competitor
                             to Dogecoin. According to Whalestats, the crypto whale-watching platform, by
                             August 2022, 41% of SHIB were “burned” (sent to “dead wallets” and effectively
                             taken out of circulation). However, the next top 10 SHIB holders were estimated
                             to be holding around 21%–23% of the total tokens (or 36%–39% of total coins
                             in circulation). This might have allowed those “whales” to easily influence the
                             price of SHIB. A glimpse into the trading volume might offer a hint about the
                             effect on price action in a thin trading market environment, when the average
                             daily trading volume was less than 10% of the total SHIB tokens. Exhibit 8 shows
                             data on SHIB’s price and trading volume.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Digital Asset Investment Forms                                                                                                                                                        199


​




    Exhibit 8: Price Action and Trading Volume in Shiba Inu
​




                                          40,000                                                                                     45,000


                                          35,000                                                                                     40,000


                                                                                                                                     35,000




                                                                                                                                              Market Capitalization in USD millions
                                          30,000
             Trading volume in millions




                                                                                                                                     30,000
                                          25,000
                                                                                                                                     25,000
                                          20,000
                                                                                                                                     20,000

                                          15,000
                                                                                                                                     15,000

                                          10,000
                                                                                                                                     10,000

                                           5,000                                                                                     5,000


                                              0                                                                                      0
                                            Dec-2020   Apr-2021        Aug-2021    Dec-2021          Apr-2022             Aug-2022

                                                             Volume in millions   Market Capitalization in USD millions




Indirect Digital Asset Investment Forms
Several alternatives exist to gain indirect exposure to digital assets, including the
following:
     ■   Cryptocurrency coin trusts allow investors to trade shares in trusts holding
         large pools of a cryptocurrency and that trade over the counter (OTC) and
         behave like closed-end funds. For an investor in a coin trust, there is no
         need to create a digital wallet and use encryption keys to invest in cryp-
         tocurrencies. Additionally, the trusts may provide additional transparency
         into trading. The trusts charge substantial fees and expenses, in some cases
         in excess of 2%, and may trade at a premium or discount to their net asset
         values.
     ■   Cryptocurrency futures contracts are agreements to buy or sell a specific
         quantity of Bitcoin or other cryptocurrency at a specified price on a par-
         ticular future date. For instance, trading in Bitcoin futures on the Chicago
         Mercantile Exchange (CME) is based on the CME CF Bitcoin Reference
         Rate, which tracks the price of spot Bitcoin trading on cryptocurrency
         exchanges. Unlike physical commodities, these contracts are typically cash
         settled, with no actual cryptocurrency changing hands. Trading in futures
         is inherently leveraged. The market for cryptocurrency futures may be less
         developed and potentially less liquid and more volatile than more estab-
         lished futures markets.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
200   Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets


                              ■   Cryptocurrency exchange-traded funds: An increasing number of
                                  exchange-traded products, such as ETFs, seek to replicate digital asset
                                  investment returns. These ETFs typically do not directly invest in cryptocur-
                                  rencies and gain exposure to the value of cryptocurrencies using cash and
                                  cryptocurrency derivatives.

                                           Baywhite Financial Cryptocurrency ETF (Fund) Term Sheet
                          Fund description       The Fund is designed to provide investment results that generally
                                                 correspond to the performance of major traded cryptocurrencies.
                                                 It offers investors a convenient way to incorporate a rapidly grow-
                                                 ing digital asset into their portfolios as an alternative to traditional
                                                 investments.
                                                 The Fund does not invest directly in Bitcoin or other
                                                 cryptocurrencies.
                          Fund investment        The Fund seeks to provide capital appreciation primarily through
                          strategy               managed exposure to cryptocurrency futures contracts.
                                                 The Fund does not invest directly in cryptocurrencies.
                                                 The value of cryptocurrencies is not backed by any government,
                                                 corporation, or other identified body authorized to legally issue
                                                 currency. Instead, its value is determined in part by the supply and
                                                 demand in markets created to facilitate trading of cryptocurrencies.
                                                 Ownership and transaction records for cryptocurrencies are pro-
                                                 tected through public-key cryptography. The supply of cryptocur-
                                                 rencies is typically determined by protocols that are unique to each
                                                 specific cryptocurrency.
                                                 The Fund may also invest in
                                                 Cryptocurrency futures contracts, standardized, cash-settled crypto-
                                                 currency futures contracts traded on exchanges
                                                 Money market instruments, such as short-term cash instruments
                                                 with high-quality credit profiles, including short-term government
                                                 debt and repurchase agreements
                          Fund trading           The Fund is bought and sold through a brokerage account, eliminat-
                                                 ing the need for a cryptocurrency exchange account or wallet.
                          Fund expenses          Annual Fund operating expenses are 1.50% of NAV.
                          Additional             The Fund is non-diversified, with the ability to invest a relatively high
                          considerations         percentage of its assets in financial instruments with a single coun-
                                                 terparty or a few counterparties.
                                                 Cryptocurrencies and cryptocurrency futures are relatively new
                                                 investments. They are subject to unique and substantial risks and
                                                 historically have been subject to significant price volatility. The value
                                                 of an investment in the Fund could decline significantly and without
                                                 warning, including to zero.


                              ■   Cryptocurrency stocks provide indirect exposure due to their activity and
                                  relationship to digital assets. Examples include equity in publicly traded
                                  digital exchanges; payment providers accepting cryptocurrencies; corpora-
                                  tions accepting cryptocurrencies as payments, investing in cryptocurrencies,
                                  or mining cryptocurrencies; and corporations developing and/or manufac-
                                  turing products or services that are used for running blockchain networks,
                                  such as specialized computers used for mining.
                              ■   Hedge funds investing in cryptocurrencies, such as discretionary long, long/
                                  short, quantitative, and multi-strategy, have emerged as a major source of
                                  indirect digital asset investing. Several hedge funds actively mine for Bitcoin
                                  to generate further returns.
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Digital Asset Investment Forms                                                                 201



             Sequester Capital LLC Crypto Hedge Fund (“Fund”) Term Sheet
Fund description The Fund is designed to provide investment results that generally corre-
                 spond to the performance of major traded cryptocurrencies. The Fund
                 invests directly in multiple cryptocurrencies.
Fund investment    The Fund uses a combination of common hedge fund strategies, includ-
strategy           ing quantitatively driven trading strategies, discretionary long/short
                   positions, and discretionary long-only positions in cryptocurrencies and
                   other digital assets.
                   The Fund invests in multiple cryptocurrencies, including Bitcoin, Ether,
                   Litecoin, Cardano, Solana, and Polkadot. Additionally, the Fund trades
                   in cryptocurrency derivatives and may from time to time take specu-
                   lative short positions in certain cryptocurrencies that it believes to be
                   overvalued.
                   The Fund may engage in lending and borrowing cryptocurrencies.




Digital Forms of Investment for Non-Digital Assets
These represent similar digital forms of investment with an underlying non-digital
asset from which the investment derives its value.
     A recent development is asset-backed tokens, digital claims on physical assets,
financial assets, or financial instruments that are collateralized by the underlying
asset and derive their value directly from the underlying asset. Asset-backed tokens
are a digital representation of the ownership. Tokenized assets include gold, crude
oil, real estate, and equities.
     Asset-backed tokens could increase liquidity by allowing for fractional ownership
of high-priced assets, such as houses, art, precious metals, and precious stones, which
allows multiple investors to possess a fractional interest of the same asset. The digital
representation of the ownership allows for an immutable record of ownership infor-
mation and ownership transfer, which increases the transparency of these transactions
and reduces transaction, intermediation, and record-keeping costs.
     Financial regulators typically classify asset-backed tokens as securities, as the own-
ership of the token entitles the holder to an ownership interest in the underlying asset.
     Asset-backed tokens are often issued on the Ethereum network or other smart
contract platforms that allow for peer-to-peer interaction using interoperable, trans-
parent smart contracts that persist for the duration of the chain. These decentralized
applications, or dApps, allow for transactions to take place—and to be recorded on
the blockchain—without a central coordinating mechanism.
     The push for financial decentralized applications grew into a movement known
as decentralized finance, or DeFi. DeFi seeks to design, combine, and develop vari-
ous open-source financial applications as building blocks for sophisticated financial
products and services. Effectively, DeFi is a marketplace of dApps that are designed to
perform various core financial functions, including potentially acting as a medium of
exchange, storage of value, tokenization of underlying assets, and immutable record
keeping of ownership and transfer of ownership. Effectively, all kinds of smart contracts
can be embedded in dApps to handle nearly all aspects of the traditional financial
system, such as lending, trading, investment, settlement, payment, and transfer in a
decentralized, authenticated and instantaneous manner. Some advocates of DeFi argue
that the modern blockchain ecosystem may have more technical advantages over the
traditional finance system—for example, time saving and risk reduction in settlement
and asset transfer. However, the nascent idea of DeFi is yet to be fully developed. To
date, most dApps have centered around extending leverage to investment and spec-
ulation in digital assets.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
202   Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets




                           QUESTION SET


                             1. Compare and contrast centralized cryptocurrency exchanges and
                                decentralized cryptocurrency exchanges.
                                Solution:

                                 ■   Centralized exchanges are privately held. They provide trading plat-
                                     forms for cryptocurrencies and offer volume, liquidity, and price trans-
                                     parency. Trading is electronic and direct, without any intermediating
                                     broker or dealer, and is hosted on private servers, exposing the cen-
                                     tralized exchanges and their clients to security vulnerabilities. Should
                                     the exchange's servers be attacked, the entire system may be compro-
                                     mised, halting trade, and leaking vital user information. Depending
                                     on jurisdiction, some centralized exchanges are regulated as financial
                                     exchanges or other types of financial intermediaries.
                                 ■   Decentralized exchanges emulate blockchain’s decentralized protocol.
                                     Decentralized exchanges lack a centralized control mechanism and
                                     operate on a distributed platform without central coordination or con-
                                     trol. The benefit is that should one of the computers on the network be
                                     attacked, the exchange remains operational since there are numerous
                                     other computers that continue to operate on the network. That is why
                                     decentralized exchanges are substantially less susceptible to computer
                                     hacks. Decentralized exchanges are difficult to regulate because no
                                     single individual, organization, or group controls the system. Therefore
                                     those trading on decentralized exchanges are generally free of any
                                     regulatory scrutiny, allowing for potentially illegal activity.


                             2. Identify the direct and indirect forms of investment in digital assets:
                                                                      ​




                               A. Direct investment          1. Cryptocurrency ETF
                               B. Indirect investment        2. Cryptocurrency coin trust
                                                             3. Initial coin offering
                                                             4. Hedge fund investing in digital tokens
                                                             5. Buying a digital art NFT
                                                             6. Trading cryptocurrency stocks
                                                             7. Trading tokens on a cryptocurrency exchange
                                                             8. Buying Bitcoin futures on a futures exchange
                                                                      ​




                                Solution:
                                                                      ​




                               A. Direct investment          3. Initial coin offering
                                                             5. Buying a digital art NFT
                                                             7. Trading tokens on a cryptocurrency exchange
                               B. Indirect investment        1. Cryptocurrency ETF
                                                             2. Cryptocurrency coin trust
                                                             4. Hedge fund investing in digital tokens
                                                             6. Trading cryptocurrency stocks,
                                                             8. Buying Bitcoin futures on a futures exchange.
                                                                      ​
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Digital Asset Investment Risk, Return, and Diversification                                   203


  3. Which of the following is not a risk in direct investment in digital assets?
      A. Market manipulation
      B. Pump and dump schemes
      C. Failure to validate asset transfers
     Solution:
     The correct answer is C. There are several risks with direct investment in
     cryptocurrencies, including the risk for fraud, such as scam ICOs, pump and
     dump schemes, market manipulation, theft, and schemes that seek to gain
     access to credentials needed to access cryptocurrency wallet information.
     However, transactions in digital assets such as cryptocurrencies and tokens
     are verified and authenticated by cryptographical algorithms and consensus
     protocols. Once a transaction is entered between the parties, it becomes
     validated on the blockchain and creates a permanent record of the transac-
     tion. Therefore, the DLT technology makes it very unlikely to fail validating
     asset transfers.

  4. Determine the correct answers to fill in the blanks: DeFi is loosely defined
     as a marketplace for _________________ that allows for financial transac-
     tions to take place and to be recorded on the _________________ without
     a central coordinating mechanism. DeFi seeks to design, combine, and
     develop various _____________________ as building blocks for sophisticated
     financial products and services.
     Solution:
     DeFi is loosely defined as a marketplace for dApps (or decentralized applica-
     tions) that allow for financial transactions to take place and to be recorded
     on the blockchain without a central coordinating mechanism. DeFi seeks to
     design, combine, and develop various open-source financial applications as
     building blocks for sophisticated financial products and services.




DIGITAL ASSET INVESTMENT RISK, RETURN, AND
DIVERSIFICATION                                                                          5
             analyze sources of risk, return, and diversification among digital
             asset investments

Value appreciation of digital assets, such as Bitcoin and Ethereum, has been rapid
since inception, most recently fueled by the introduction of more traditional indirect
forms of investment. Because cryptocurrencies are a relatively new innovation, their
market is subject to rapid price swings, changes, and uncertainty, with most investors
considering them alternative investments.
                              © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
204       Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets



                              Digital Asset Investment Risks and Returns
                              Bitcoin and other cryptocurrency values are based solely on asset appreciation, with
                              no underlying cash flows. The market demand for the limited supply of cryptocur-
                              rencies is a significant driver of prices. For instance, the supply of Bitcoin is limited
                              to 21 million Bitcoins, by design. For this reason, Bitcoins are sometimes viewed by
                              some investors as the digital version of gold.
                                  Since its launch in 2009, Bitcoin’s performance has been characterized by high
                              return, high volatility, and low correlations with traditional asset classes, as seen in
                              Exhibit 9 and Exhibit 10.



                                 Exhibit 9: Monthly Log-Returns for Bitcoin and Asset Class Benchmarks
                                 between January 2011 and January 2022

                                                                                                                     Bloomberg
                                                                                S&P 500                                Global
                                                                              Index Total        MSCI World          Aggregate
                                                         Bitcoin in USD          Return         Index Return            Index

                              Average                          8.84%              1.13%              0.66%               0.16%
                              Standard deviation                0.32               0.04               0.04                0.01
                              Coefficient of
                              variation                         3.66               3.43               6.09                8.16

                              Notes: Bitcoin price in US dollars, S&P 500 Total Return, MSCI World Index, and Bloomberg Global
                              Aggregate Bond Index are log-returns for January 2011 to December 2022. All series are in US dollars.

                              From mid-2010, when publicly available market prices were available, Bitcoin price has
                              risen from USD0.05 at inception to the historical peak of USD68,789 on 10 November
                              2021, before a subsequent crash took it down to around USD17,709 on 18 June 2022.
                              Early investors in Bitcoins were hugely rewarded with phenomenal price appreciation.
                                   Investing in cryptocurrencies therefore comes with material risks unique to digital
                              assets. Cryptocurrencies have a relatively brief track record, yet their volatility has
                              remained high, as Exhibit 10 shows. Although the volatility of Bitcoin has declined,
                              it is still much higher than the volatility of traditional financial assets, such as the
                              S&P 500 Index.



  Exhibit 10: Distribution of Monthly Log-Returns for Bitcoin and Asset Class Benchmarks between January
  2011 and January 2022
      200%

       150%

       100%

       50%

        0%

      –50%

      –100%

                                  Bitcoin in USD                 SS&P 500 Index Total Return
                                  MSCI World Index Return        Bloomberg Global Aggregate Index
                      © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Digital Asset Investment Risk, Return, and Diversification                                                                             205


   Notes: Bitcoin price in US dollars, S&P 500 Total Return, MSCI World Index, and Bloomberg Global Aggregate Bond Index are log-returns
   for January 2011 to January 2022. All series are in US dollars.




Bitcoin-like price and return patterns are often observed in other cryptocurrencies
and may reflect a great deal of uncertainty about cryptocurrencies as an investable
asset class. Given that regulation of cryptocurrencies is evolving, there still is no clear
legal protection for using them as a medium of exchange. While they are regulated as
a digital commodity in the United States and comprehensive rules in the EU remain
pending, there is a great deal of uncertainty from an investor perspective about
the quality of legal protection an investor can enjoy when investing in these assets.
Considering that fraud and criminal activities are rampant among buyers, sellers,
issuers, and marketers of digital assets, the continued legal and regulatory uncertainty
is non-trivial. Multiple countries have placed extensive restrictions on trading and
owning cryptocurrencies, such as China, which banned the asset in 2021.


Diversification Benefits of Digital Asset Investments
Although purely speculative in nature, considered by some to have value drivers
distinct from common equity and debt markets, cryptocurrencies have exhibited
low correlations with traditional asset class returns. This may provide a hint that
the long-term determinants of cryptocurrency prices differ from those of traditional
investment assets. In practice, prices (or returns) of cryptocurrencies are driven
more by market adoption, network effects, technological advancement, regulatory
development, speculation, and general market risk appetite. Some of these factors
are unique to this asset class. Exhibit 11 shows the monthly correlation of Bitcoin
with some benchmarks.



  Exhibit 11: Correlations between Monthly Log-Returns for Cryptocurrencies
  and Selected Asset Classes (January 2011 to January 2022)

                         Bitcoin in      S&P 500 Index        MSCI World         Bloomberg Global
                         US Dollars       Total Return       Index Return         Aggregate Index

Bitcoin in US
dollars                       1
S&P 500 Index
Total Return                 0.21                1
MSCI World Index
Return                       0.22              0.97                 1
Bloomberg Global
Aggregate Index              0.14              0.25                0.33                    1

Notes: Bitcoin price in US dollars, S&P 500 Total Return, MSCI World Index, and Bloomberg Global
Aggregate Bond Index are log-returns for January 2011 to January 2022. All series are in US dollars.

In this way, cryptocurrencies are potential portfolio diversifiers. The correlation of
cryptocurrencies with traditional assets appears to increase, and the correlation and
diversification benefits of cryptocurrencies remain to be seen.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
206   Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets




                           QUESTION SET


                             1. More institutional investors are allocating capital to cryptocurren-
                                cies because of their:
                                 A. low price volatility.
                                 B. high expected cash flow.
                                 C. low correlation with other traditional asset classes.
                                Solution:
                                The correct answer is C. The value of Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies is
                                based solely on asset appreciation, with no underlying cash flows. Histori-
                                cally, their price volatility has been extremely high. As such, cryptocurren-
                                cies are often considered a high-risk investment. Nevertheless, more insti-
                                tutional investors allocate their investment into cryptocurrencies because of
                                the low historical correlation with other traditional asset classes, providing
                                potential diversification benefits to a portfolio.

                             2. Explain the historical characteristics of cryptocurrencies’ correlation with
                                other traditional investments.
                                Solution:
                                Cryptocurrencies have historically exhibited low long-term correlations
                                with traditional asset class returns. Prices of cryptocurrencies are driven
                                more by market adoption, network effects, technological advancement, reg-
                                ulatory development, and general market risk appetite. Some of these fac-
                                tors are unique to this asset class. But as institutional participation increases
                                in digital assets, the correlations with traditional assets have risen.

                             3. Identify the following statement as true or false: Regulatory uncertainty is a
                                non-trivial risk for investors in cryptocurrencies.
                                Solution:
                                True. Regulatory uncertainty is a non-trivial risk for investors in crypto-
                                currencies because there is considerable risk of fraud and criminal activity
                                among participants, and legal protection over these assets remains uncer-
                                tain. Regulation of cryptocurrencies is evolving; some countries have adopt-
                                ed them, while some have banned them altogether.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Practice Problems                                                                      207




   PRACTICE PROBLEMS
1. A benefit of distributed ledger technology (DLT) that increases its use by the
   investment industry is its:
   A. scalability of underlying systems.

   B. ease of integration with existing systems.

   C. streamlining of current post-trade processes.

2. What is a DLT application suited for physical assets?
   A. Tokenization

   B. Cryptocurrencies

   C. Permissioned networks

3. A cryptocurrency miner can earn new digital assets by:
   A. solving complex algorithm puzzles to validate blocks of transactions onto a
      blockchain network based on a PoS protocol.

   B. staking his own cryptocurrencies to validate blocks of transactions onto a
      blockchain network based on a PoW protocol.

   C. validating and locking transactions onto a blockchain irrespective of the
      consensus protocol adopted by the particular network.

4. The perceived value of a cryptocurrency depends on the following factors except:
   A. the maximum supply of the cryptocurrencies.

   B. the underlying cash flow of the cryptocurrencies.

   C. whether the relevant blockchain operates on a permissionless or permis-
      sioned network.

5. A key difference between digital assets and traditional financial assets is that:
   A. digital assets are usually subject to a well-defined set of regulations.

   B. transactions in digital assets are most likely kept on private centralized
      ledgers.

   C. digital assets are valued not on their earnings but on the expected price
      appreciation given supply limitation.

6. Asset-backed tokens have the potential of improving the liquidity of the underly-
   ing assets because:
   A. they allow for fractional ownership of high-value assets.

   B. costs of validating the transactions are reduced on the blockchains.

   C. they make it easier to trade the underlying assets on centralized exchanges.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
208   Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets


                          7. Which of the following is the least vulnerable to a computer security hack?
                              A. Cryptocurrency wallets

                              B. Centralized cryptocurrency exchanges

                              C. Decentralized cryptocurrency exchanges

                          8. An investor who wants to replicate the return on Bitcoins without the use of a
                             digital wallet can best do so by:
                              A. investing in a cryptocurrency coin trust that holds Bitcoins.

                              B. investing in a listed cryptocurrency exchange stock.

                              C. buying Bitcoins from a centralized cryptocurrency exchange.

                          9. Which of the following is a key building block of dApps?
                              A. Bitcoins

                              B. Smart contracts

                              C. Centralized exchanges

                          10. Compared to traditional equity investment, the historical return distribution of
                              Bitcoins shows:
                              A. negative skewness.

                              B. high mean returns.

                              C. low standard deviation.

                          11. Despite higher volatility, cryptocurrencies may offer diversification benefits to an
                              investment portfolio due to their:
                              A. scarcity value.

                              B. expected higher return.

                              C. lower correlation with other traditional investments.

                          12. Price volatility of cryptocurrencies is high most likely because they are:
                              A. subject to self-imposed limit on supply.

                              B. correlated with traditional risky asset classes.

                              C. highly speculative with no fundamental value or cash flow.
                     © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
Solutions                                                                                  209




   SOLUTIONS
1. The correct answer is C. DLT has the potential to streamline the existing, often
   complex and labor-intensive post-trade processes in securities markets by pro-
   viding close to real-time trade verification, reconciliation, and settlement, thereby
   reducing related complexity, time, and costs.

2. The correct answer is A. Through tokenization—the process of representing
   ownership rights to physical assets on a blockchain or distributed ledger—DLT
   has the potential to streamline this rights process by creating a single digital re-
   cord of ownership with which to verify ownership title and authenticity, includ-
   ing all historical activity.

3. The correct answer is C. Under both PoW and PoS consensus protocols, the val-
   idation of the transactions, or “mining,” always comes with rewards. A successful
   miner that validates the transactions obtains new digital assets—either a cryp-
   tocurrency or a token. For blockchain networks based on the PoW protocol, the
   miner earns his digital assets by solving complex algorithm puzzles to validate
   blocks of transactions onto a blockchain network. For blockchain networks based
   on the PoS protocol, the miner earns his digital assets by staking his own to vali-
   date and attest to the new blocks of transactions.

4. The correct answer is B. A cryptocurrency derives its price solely from an
   anticipated asset appreciation given the perceived scarcity value arising from a
   self-imposed limit of supply. Whether a cryptocurrency transaction is validated
   in a permissionless or permissioned network using either PoS or PoW standard
   also impacts its perceived value. But most digital assets do not have an inherent
   value based on underlying assets or on the potential cash flow.

5. The correct answer is C. Unlike traditional financial assets, most digital assets do
   not have an inherent value based on underlying assets or the potential cash flow
   or earnings they are expected to generate. Digital asset transactions are usually
   kept on decentralized digital ledgers using cryptography and algorithms without
   any central intermediaries. Regulations around digital assets are also ambigu-
   ous and evolving, unlike most traditional financial assets, which are subject to a
   well-defined set of regulations.

6. The correct answer is A. Asset-backed tokens can increase liquidity by allowing
   for fractional ownership of high-priced assets, such as houses, art, precious met-
   als, and precious stones, which allows multiple investors to possess a fractional
   interest of the same asset. B is incorrect because the validation of transactions on
   the blockchains takes up a substantial amount of computing power, which can be
   expensive.

7. The correct answer is C. Decentralized exchanges operate on a distributed
   platform without central coordination or control. The benefit is that should one
   of the computers on the network be attacked, the exchange remains operation-
   al since there are numerous other computers that continue to operate on the
   network. For this reason, decentralized exchanges are substantially more difficult
   to hack, rendering such attacks almost certain to fail. However, transactions on
   centralized cryptocurrency exchanges are hosted on private servers, exposing
   the centralized exchanges and their clients to security vulnerabilities. Should the
   exchange’s servers become compromised, the entire system may become para-
   lyzed, halting trade and leaking vital user information, such as cryptographic keys
   stored in the cryptocurrency wallets.
                          © CFA Institute. For candidate use only. Not for distribution.
210   Learning Module 7                                                           Introduction to Digital Assets


                          8. The correct answer is A. Investing in a cryptocurrency coin trust that holds
                             Bitcoins is the best way to replicate the return on Bitcoins. Investing in a list-
                             ed cryptocurrency exchange stock provides very indirect exposure that may
                             not necessarily replicate the performance of Bitcoins because of a variety of
                             company-specific factors, as well as the sensitivity to the general stock market en-
                             vironment. Buying Bitcoins from a centralized cryptocurrency exchange provides
                             a direct exposure, but it would require a digital wallet.

                          9. The correct answer is B. Smart contracts are the building block of dApps. dApps
                             are usually developed on the Ethereum blockchain network or other smart
                             contract platforms that allow for peer-to-peer interaction using interoperable,
                             transparent smart contracts that persist for the duration of the chain. These
                             decentralized applications, or dApps, allow for transactions to take place—and
                             to be recorded on the blockchain—without a central coordinating mechanism or
                             centralized exchange.

                          10. The correct answer is B. Historical Bitcoin returns are characterized by high
                              mean returns and high standard deviation. Despite the high volatility, the return
                              distribution is positively skewed.

                          11. The correct answer is C. Although purely speculative in nature, cryptocurrencies
                              have historically exhibited low correlations with traditional asset class returns
                              and are considered to have value drivers distinct from common equity and debt
                              markets. Therefore, cryptocurrencies are potential diversifiers of an investment
                              portfolio.

                          12. The correct answer is C. Cryptocurrencies are purely speculative, with no fun-
                              damental value or future cash flow. There is no consensus on how to value them.
                              Their markets are therefore subject to rapid price swings, changes, and uncer-
                              tainty. But historically, their performance has relatively low correlations with
                              traditional asset classes.
